 All right, Sam what's happening not much coming in here appreciate it. Thanks for having me. So what have you done?

 Like ever no, I mean, what have you done with AI? I mean, it's

 one of the things

 About this is I mean, I think everyone is fascinated by it. I mean everyone is

 absolutely blown away at the current capability and

 Wondering what the potential for the future is and whether or not that's a good thing

 I

 Think it's gonna be a great thing, but I think it's not gonna be all a great thing and that that is where I

 Think

 That's where all of the complexity comes in for people

 It's not this like clean story of we're gonna do this and it's all gonna be great. It's we're gonna do this

 It's gonna be net great, but it's gonna be

 like a technological revolution, it's gonna be societal revolution and

 Those always come with change and even if it's like net wonderful, you know, there's things we're gonna lose along the way

 some kinds of jobs some kind of parts of our way of life some parts of the way we live are gonna change or

 go away and

 Eat no matter how tremendous the upside is there and I believe it will be tremendously good

 You know, there's a lot of stuff we got to navigate through to make sure

 That's

 That's a complicated thing for anyone to wrap their heads around and there's you know, deep and super understandable emotions around that

 That's a very honest answer that it's not all gonna be good

 but

 It seems inevitable at this point. It's yeah

 I mean, it's definitely inevitable my my view of the world, you know

 when you're like a kid in school you learn about this technological revolution and then that one and then that one and

 my view of the world now sort of looking backwards and forwards is that

 This is like one long technological revolution

 and we had sure like first we had to figure out agriculture so that we had the

 Resources and time to figure out how to build machines

 Then we got this industrial revolution and that made us learn about a lot of stuff a lot of other scientific discovery, too

 Let us do the computer revolution and that's now letting us as we scale up to these massive systems do the AI revolution

 but it really is just one long story of

 humans discovering science and technology and co-evolving with it and

 I think it's the most exciting story of all time. I think it's how we get to this world of abundance and

 although

 You know, although we do have these things to navigate and there will be these downsides if you think about what it means for the

 World and for people's quality of lives if we can get to a world

 where the the cost of intelligence and the abundance that comes with that

 The cost dramatically falls the abundance goes ways up goes way up

 I think we'll do the same thing with the energy and I think those are the two sort of key inputs to everything else

 We want so if we can have abundant and cheap energy and intelligence

 That will transform people's lives largely for the better

 And I think it's gonna in the same way that if we could go back now 500 years and look at someone's life

 We'd say well, there's some great things, but they didn't have this they didn't have that. Can you believe they didn't have modern medicine?

 That's what people are gonna look back at us like but in 50 years

 When you think about the people that currently rely on jobs that AI will replace

 When you think about whether it's truck drivers or automation workers people that work in factory assembly lines

 What if anything what strategies can be put to mitigate the negative?

 downsides of those jobs being eliminated by AI

 so

 I'll talk about some general thoughts, but I find making very specific

 Predictions difficult because the way the technology goes has been so different than even my own

 Intuitions or certainly in my own intuitions could we maybe we should stop there and back up a little what we what were your initial?

 Thoughts if you had asked me ten years ago, I would have said first AI is gonna come for

 Blue collar labor. Basically, it's gonna drive trucks and do factory work and you know, it'll handle heavy machinery

 Then maybe after that it'll do like

 Some kinds of cognitive labor kind of you know, but not it won't be off doing what I think of personally is the really hard stuff

 It won't be off proving new mathematical theorems won't be off, you know discovering new science

 Won't be off writing code and then eventually

 Maybe but maybe last of all maybe never because human creativity is this magic special special thing last of all it'll come for the creative

 jobs

 That's what I would have said

 now a

 It looks to me like and for a while AI is much better doing tasks than doing jobs

 It can do these little pieces super well, but sometimes it goes off the rails. I can't keep like very long coherence

 So people are instead just able to do their existing jobs way more productively

 But you really still need the human there today and then be it's going exactly the other direction

 Could do the creative work first stuff like coding second

 They can do things like other kinds of cognitive labor third and we're the furthest away from like humanoid robots

 hmm

 So back to the initial question

 if we do have

 Something that completely eliminates factory workers completely eliminates

 truck drivers delivery drivers things along those lines that

 Creates this massive vacuum in our society. So I

 think there's things that

 we're gonna do that are

 Good to do but not sufficient. So I think at some point we will do something like a UBI or some other kind of like

 very long-term unemployment insurance something but we'll have some way of

 Giving people like redistributing money in society as a cushion for people as people figure out the new jobs

 but

 And I maybe I should touch on that. I I'm not a believer at all that there won't be lots of new jobs

 I think human

 Creativity desire for status wanting different ways to compete invent new things feel part of a community feel valued

 That's not gonna go anywhere. People have worried about that forever. What happens is we get better tools and

 We just invent new things and more amazing things to do and there's a big universe out there

 And and I think I mean that like literally in that there's like space is really big

 But also there's just so much stuff we can all do if we do get to this world of

 abundant intelligence where you can sort of just think of a new idea and it gets created but

 But again that doesn't

 To the point we started with that that that doesn't provide like great solace to people who are losing their jobs today

 So saying there's gonna be this great indefinite stuff in the future people are like, what are we doing today? So, you know

 Well, I think we will as a society do things like UBI and other ways of redistribution

 But I don't think that gets at the core of what people want

 I think what people want is like agency self-determination the ability to

 Play a role in architecting the future along with the rest of society the ability to express themselves and

 create something meaningful to them and

 Also, I think a lot of people work jobs

 They hate and I think there's we as a society are always a little bit confused about whether we want to work more work less

 but but somehow

 That

 We all get to do something meaningful and we all get to

 Play our role in driving the future forward. That's really important

 and what I hope is as those truck driving long haul truck driving jobs go away, which

 You know people have been wrong about predicting how fast that's gonna happen, but it's gonna happen

 we figure out not just a way to

 Solve the economic problem by like

 Giving people the equivalent of money every month, but that there's a way that

 And we've had a lot of ideas about this. There's a way that we like share

 ownership and decision making over the future I

 think I say a lot about AGI is that

 Everyone everyone realizes we're gonna have to share the benefits of that

 But we also have to share like the decision-making over the future

 We also have to share like the decision-making over it and access to the system itself

 like I'd be more excited about a world where we say rather than give everybody on earth like 1/8 billionth of the

 AGI money which we should do that to we say you get like 1/8 billionth of a 1/8 billionth slice of the system

 You can sell it somebody else you can sell to a company. You can pool it with other people

 You can use it for whatever creative pursuit you want. You can use it to figure out how to start some new business

 And with that you get sort of like a

 Voting right over how this is all going to be used

 And so the better the AGI gets the more your little 1/8 billionth ownership is worth to you

 We were joking around the other day on the podcast where I was saying that what we need is an AI

 Government that we should we should I president and have AI just make all the decisions

 Yeah, I have something that's completely unbiased

 Absolutely rational has the accumulated knowledge of the entire human history. Yeah at its disposal including all

 knowledge of psychology and psychological study including UBI because that comes with a host of you know pitfalls and

 Issues that people have with it. So I'll say something there

 Um, I think we're still very far away from a system that is capable enough and reliable enough that you

 That any of us would want that but I'll tell you something I love about that

 Someday, let's say that thing gets built the fact that it can go around and talk to every person on earth

 Understand their exact preferences at a very deep level

 you know how they think about this issue and that one and how they balance the trade-offs and what they want and then understand all

 of that and and like

 collectively optimized

 Optimized for the collective preferences of humanity or of citizens of the US. That's awesome

 As long as it's not

 Co-opted right our government currently is co-opted. That's for sure

 We know for sure that our government is heavily influenced by special interests

 if we could have an artificial intelligence

 Government that has no influence. Nothing has influence on it. What a fascinating idea. It's possible

 And I think it might be the only way

 Where you're gonna get completely objective

 the absolute most intelligent decision for

 Virtually every problem every dilemma that we face currently in society

 Would you truly be comfortable handing over like final decision-making and say alright AI you got it?

 No, no, but I'm not comfortable doing that with anybody right, you know, I mean, I don't write I was uncomfortable with the Patriot Act

 I'm uncomfortable with you know, many decisions of people that are being made

 It's just there's so much

 obvious evidence that

 Decisions that are being made or not being made in the best interest of the overall

 Well of the people it's being made in the decisions of whatever

 Gigantic corporations that have donated to and what whatever the military industrial complex and

 Pharmaceutical industrial complex and and it's just the money

 It's that's really what we know today that money has a massive influence on on our society and the choices that get made and

 The overall good or bad for the population. Yeah, I have no disagreement at all that

 The current system is super broken not working for people super corrupt corrupt and for sure like

 Unbelievably run by money. Yeah, and and I think there is a way to do a

 Better job than that with AI just in some way

 But and this might just be like a factor of sitting with the systems all day and watching all of the ways they fail

 We got a long way to go a long way to go. I'm sure but when you think of a GI

 When you think of the possible future like where it goes to do you ever?

 extrapolate do you ever like sit and pause and say well if this thing if this becomes sentient and it has the ability to

 Make better versions of yourself. How long before we're literally dealing with a god

 so

 the way that I think about this is it used to be that like a GI was this

 very binary moment it was before and after and I think I was totally wrong about that and

 The right way to think about it. Is this

 Continual continuum of intelligence this smooth exponential curve back all the way to that sort of smooth curve curve of technological revolution

 the the amount of

 Compute power we can put into the system the scientific ideas about how to make it more efficient and smarter to give it

 The ability to do reasoning to think about how to improve itself

 That will all come but my model for a long time

 I think if you look at the world of AGI thinkers, there's there's sort of two

 Particularly around the safety issues you're talking about. There's two axes that matter

 There's the short what called short timelines or long timelines, you know to the first

 Milestone of AGI whatever that's gonna be is that gonna happen in a few years a few decades maybe even longer

 Although at this point I think most people are a few years a few decades and then there's takeoff speed

 Once we get there from there to that point you're talking about where it's capable of the rapid self-improvement

 Is that a slower a faster process?

 the the world that I think we're heading that we're in and also the world that I think is the most controllable and the safest is

 the

 short timelines and slow takeoff quadrant and

 I

 Think we're gonna have you know

 there were a lot of very smart people for a while were like the thing you were just talking about happens in a day or

 Three days and I don't that doesn't seem likely to me given the shape of the technology as we understand it

 now now even if that happens in a

 decade or three decades, it's still like the blink of an eye from a historical perspective and

 There are gonna be some real challenges to getting that right and the decisions we make

 The the sort of safety systems and the and the checks that the world puts in place how we think about

 Global regulation or

 Rules of the road from a safety perspective for those projects. It's super important because you can imagine many things going horribly wrong

 but I've been I

 feel cheerful about the progress the world is making towards taking this seriously and

 You know, it reminds me of what I've read about the conversations that the world had right around the development of nuclear weapons. Hmm

 It seems to me that this is at least in terms of public consciousness. This is emerged very rapidly

 Where I don't think anyone was really aware people that were aware of the concept of artificial intelligence

 But they didn't think that it was going to be implemented

 so

 Comprehensively so quickly. Yeah, so

 Chat GPT is on what four point five now for four and with four point five

 There'll be some sort of an exponential increase in its abilities. It'll be somewhat better

 each step, you know from each like half step like that you

 You kind of humans have this ability to like get used to any new technology

 So quickly the thing that I think was unusual about the launch of chat GPT three point five and then four was that?

 People hadn't really been paying attention and that's part of the reason we deploy

 We think it's very important that people and institutions have time to gradually understand this react

 Co-design the society that we want with it

 And if you just build a GI in secret in a lab and then drop it on the world all at once

 I think that's a really bad idea. So

 We we had been trying to talk to the world about this for a while

 People if you don't give people something they can feel and use in their lives. They don't quite take it seriously

 Everybody's busy. And so there was this big overhang from where the technology was to where public consciousness was

 Now that's caught up. We've deployed. I think people understand it

 I don't expect the few to jump from like four to whenever we finish 4.5, which be a while

 I don't expect that to be

 The crazy I think the crazy switch the crazy adjustment that people have had to go through has mostly happened

 I think most people have gone from thinking that AGI was

 science fiction and very far off to something that is gonna happen and now is like a one-time reframe and

 Now, you know every year you get a new iPhone

 Over the 15 years or whatever since the launch they've gotten dramatically better, but iPhone to iPhone you're like, yeah, okay

 It's a little better. Hmm, but now if you go hold up the first iPhone to the 15 or whatever, that's a big difference

 GPT 3.5 to AGI. That'll be a big difference

 But along the way it'll just get incrementally better. Do you think about the convergence of things like?

 Neuralink and there's a few competing technologies where they're trying to implement some sort of

 some sort of a connection between the human biological system and

 technology

 Um, do you want one of those things in your head?

 I don't until everybody does right and you know

 I have a joke about it

 But it's like the idea is like once it gets you have to kind of because everybody's gonna have it

 So one of the hard

 questions about

 The Mer all of the related merge stuff is exactly what you just said like as a society are we gonna let

 some people merge with AGI right now others and

 If we do then and you choose not to like what does that mean for you right and will you be protected

 How you get that moment, right, you know if we'd like imagine like all the way out to the sci-fi

 Future I've been a lot of sci-fi books written about how you get that moment, right?

 You know, yeah, let's do that first. What about people who don't want to how do you make sure that people that do it first?

 Like actually help lift everybody up together. Yeah, how do you make sure people who want to just like live their very human life?

 Get to do that. That stuff is really hard and honestly

 So far off from my problems of the day that I don't get to think about that as much as I'd like to because I do

 Think it's super interesting. Um, I

 But yeah, it seems like if we just think

 logically, that's gonna be a huge challenge at some point and

 People are gonna want

 Wildly divergent things but

 there is a societal question about how we're gonna like

 The questions of fairness that come there and what it means for the people who don't do it

 Super super complicated. Anyway on the neural interface side. I'm in the short term like before we figure out how to

 Upload someone's conscience into a computer if that's even possible at all, which I think there's

 plenty of

 sides you could take on why it's not the

 The thing that I find myself most interested in is

 What we can do without

 drilling a hole in someone's head

 how much of the inner monologue can we read out with an externally mounted device and if we have a

 imperfect low bandwidth low accuracy

 Neural interface can people still just learn how to use it really well in a way

 That's like quite powerful for what they can now do with a new computing platform. And my guess is we'll figure that out

 I'm sure you've seen that headpiece. There's a demonstration where there's someone asking someone a question

 They have this headpiece on they think the question and then they literally Google the question get the answers through their head

 That's the kind of thing. We've been it that's the kind of direction we've been exploring. Yeah

 That seems to me to be step one. That's the pong of the eventual immersive 3d video games

 Like you're you're going to get these first steps and they're gonna seem sort of crude and slow

 I mean, it's essentially slower than just asking Siri. I think if someone

 Built a system where you could think

 Words doesn't have to be a question

 it could just be your passive rambling in our monologue, but certainly could be a question and

 That was being fed into GPT 5 or 6 and in your field of vision

 The words in response were being displayed. That would be the palm. Yeah, that's still soup

 That's a very valuable tool to have and that seems like that's inevitable

 There's hard work to get there on the neural interface side, but I believe it will happen

 Yeah, I think so, too

 And my concern is that the initial adopters of this will have such a massive advantage over the general population

 well, that doesn't concern me because that's like a

 You know, that's not you're not that's just like better

 That's a better computer. You're not like jacking your brain into something in a high-risk thing

 You know what you do when you don't want them when you take off the glasses. Mm-hmm. So that feels fine

 Well, this is just the external device then

 Oh, I think we can do the kind of like read your thoughts with an external device at some point. Mmm read your internal monologue

 Interesting and do you think we'll be able to communicate with an external device as well?

 telepathically or

 Semi telepathically through technology. I do. Yeah. Yeah, I do. I

 think so, too

 my real concern is that

 once we take the step to

 Use an actual neural interface when there's an actual operation and they're yeah

 Using some sort of an implant and then that implant becomes more sophisticated. It's not the iPhone one now

 It's the iPhone 15 and as these things get better and better

 We're on the road to cyborgs

 We're on the road to like why would you want to be a biological person?

 Do you really want to live in a fucking log cabin when you can be in the matrix?

 I mean, it seems like we're not

 We're on this path

 We're already a little bit down that path, right?

 Like if you take away someone's phone and they have to go function in the world today. Mm-hmm

 They're at a disadvantage. Yeah everybody else. So that's that's like a

 Maybe that's like the lightest weight version of a merge we could imagine

 But I think it's worth like if we go back to the earlier thing about the one exponential curve

 I think it's worth saying we've like lifted off the x-axis already down this path the tiniest bit and

 Yeah, even if you don't go all the way to like a neural interface

 VR will get so good that some people just don't want to take it off that much right and

 That's fine for them as long as we can solve this question of

 How do we like think about what a balance of power means in a world? I think there will be many people

 I'm certainly one of them who's like actually the human body and the human experience is pretty great that log heaven in the woods

 Pretty awesome. I don't be there all the time

 I'd love to go play the great video game, but like I'm really happy to get to go there right times

 Yeah, there's still

 human experiences that are just

 Like great human experience just laughing with friends, you know

 Kissing someone that you've never kissed before that you're on a first date that guy knows those kind of things

 They're real

 Moments, it just laughs. Yeah having a glass of wine with a friend just laughing not quite the same in VR

 Yeah, now when the VR goes super far so you can't you know

 it's like you are jacked in on your brain and you can't tell right what's real and what's not and

 Then everybody gets like super deep on the simulation hypothesis or the like Eastern religion or whatever and I don't know

 What happens at that point?

 Do you ever fuck around with simulation theory because the real problem is when you combine that with probability theory and you talk to the people

 That say well if you just look at the numbers

 The the probability that we're already in a simulation is much higher than the probability that we're not

 It's never been clear to me what to do about it, it's like okay right that into that

 Actually makes a lot of sense. Yeah, I think probably sure right that seems convincing but but now this is my reality

 yeah, this is my life and I'm gonna live it and

 I've

 You know from like

 2 a.m. In my college freshman dorm hallway till now. I've made no more progress on it than that. Mm-hmm

 What seems like one of those?

 It's there's no

 You know, it's if it is a possibility if it is real first of all once it happens, what are you gonna do?

 I mean that that is the new reality and in many ways our new reality is as

 alien to you know hunter-gatherers and 15,000 years ago as

 That would be to us now

 I mean, we're already we've already entered into some very bizarre territory where you know

 I was just having a conversation with my kids were asking questions about something and you know, I always say let's guess

 What percentage of that is this and then we just google it and then just ask Siri and we pull it up

 Like look at that like that alone

 Yeah, so bizarre compared to how it was when I was 13 and you had to go to the library

 But hope that the book was accurate totally

 I was very annoyed this more I was reading about how horrible systems like chat GBT and

 Google are from an environmental impact because it's you know using like

 some extremely tiny amount of energy for each query and

 You know how we're all destroying the world and I was like before that people drove to the library

 Yeah, how much carbon they burn sure this question versus what it takes now

 Come on those, but that's just people looking for some reason why something's bad. That's not a logical total perspective

 well, we should be looking at is the

 spectacular changes that are possible through this and

 All the problems the insurmountable problems that we have with resources with the environment with cleaning up the ocean

 Climate change there's so many problems that we need this to solve all of everything else and that's why we need president AI

 If if AI could make every scientific discovery, but we still had human presidents you think would be okay

 No, because those creeps would still be pocketing money and they'd have offshore accounts

 And it would it would always be a weird thing of corruption and how to mitigate that corruption

 Which is also one of the fascinating things about the current state of technology is that we're so much more aware of corruption

 We're so much more. There's so much

 Independent reporting and we're so much more

 Cognizant of the actual problems that are in place. This is really great. One of the thing

 one of the things that I've observed obviously many other people too is

 Corruption is such an incredible hindrance to getting anything done in a society to make it forward progress and you know

 my worldview had been

 more u.s. Centric when I was younger and as I've

 Just studied the world more and had to work in more places in the world

 Like it's amazing how much corruption there still is but the shift to a technologically enabled world

 I think is a major force against it because everything is it's harder to hide stuff

 Mmm, and I do think corruption in the world will keep trending down

 Because of its exposure. Yeah through technology if I mean that it comes at a cost

 And I think the loss that like I am very worried about how far the surveillance state could go here. Mmm, but

 in a world where

 Payments for example are no longer like bags of cash but done somehow digitally and

 Somebody even if you're using Bitcoin can like watch those flows. Mmm. I think that's like a credit corruption reducing thing. I

 Agree, but I'm very worried about central bank digital currency and that being tied to a social credit score

 Super super against yeah, that's cares

 I should wear it super against and that the push to that is not that's not for the overall good of society. That's for control

 Yeah, I think like I mean there's many things

 That I'm disappointed that the US government has done recently

 but the the war on crypto which I think is a like we can't give this up like we're gonna control this and all that

 that's like

 Make that that's the thing that like makes me quite sad about the country

 It makes me quite sad about the country too

 But then you also see with things like FTX like oh look this can get without

 Regulation and without someone overseeing it this can get really fucked

 Yeah, I'm not anti-regulation like I think there's clearly a role for it and

 I

 also think

 FTX was like a sort of

 comically bad

 Situation. Yeah, we shouldn't

 Yeah

 Yeah, but it's a fun one. Like it's totally fun. And I love that story. I mean you clearly I

 Really do I love the fact that they were all doing drugs and

 No, no, I had every part of the dramas. I'm like, uh, I

 Mean, it's a gripping story because yeah had everything there. They did their taxes with like what was the the program that they used?

 quick books

 Billions of dollars, I don't know why I think the word polycule is so funny

 But polycule that was what they like when you call a relationship like a poly but closed like poly

 Amorous molecule put together. Oh, I see. So they were like, this is our polycule

 So there's nine of them and they're poly or whatever. Yeah, you call that a polycule

 I know that was the funny like that became like a meme in Silicon Valley for a while that I thought was hilarious

 Um, you clearly want enough regulation that that can't happen

 but they're

 Like I'm not against that happening. I'm against them doing what they did. No, that's what I mean. I'm like, oh, it's kind of fun

 Go for it. No. No, I mean you want enough thing that like FTX can't lose all of its depositors money

 Yes, but but I think there's an important point here, which is you have all of this other

 regulation that people and and it didn't keep us safe and

 the basic thing which was like

 You know, let's do that. That was not all of the crypto stuff people were talking about

 hmm

 Yes, I mean the the real fascinating crypto is Bitcoin to me

 I mean, that's the one that I think has the most

 likely possibility of becoming a

 universal viable currency and

 it's

 You know, it's limited in the amount that there can be it's you know

 You people mine it with their own could be it's like that to me is very fascinating

 and I love the fact that it's been implemented and that at least something like I've had

 Andreas Antonopoulos on the podcast and he's when he talks about it

 he's

 Living it. He's spending all of his money everything he has paid is in Bitcoin. He pays his rent in Bitcoin

 Everything he does is in Bitcoin. I I helped start a project called world coin a few years ago

 That's and so I've gotten to like learn more about the space

 I'm excited about it for the same reasons

 I'm excited about Bitcoin too, but I think this idea that we have a

 global

 currency that is outside of the control of any government is a

 Super logical and important step on the tech tree. Yeah agreed. I mean, why should the government control currency?

 I mean the government should be dealing with all the pressing

 environmental social infrastructure issues foreign policy issues economic issues the things that we need to be

 Governed in order to have a peaceful and prosperous society. That's equal and equitable

 What do you think happens to money and currency after a GI? I

 I've wondered about that because I feel like with money, especially when money goes digital

 The bottleneck is access if we get to a point where all

 Information is just freely shared everywhere. There are no secrets. There are no boundaries. There are no borders

 We're reading minds. We have complete access to all of the information of

 Everything you've ever done everything everyone's ever said there's no hidden secrets

 What is money then money is this digital thing? Well, how can you possess it?

 How can you possess this digital thing if there is literally no bottleneck?

 There's no barriers to anyone accessing any information because essentially it's just ones and zeros

 Yeah, I mean another way. I think the information frame makes sense. Another way is that like money is

 Like a sort of way to trade labor or

 Trade like a limited number of hard assets like land and houses and whatever

 and

 if you think about a world where like

 Intellectual labor is just readily available and super cheap. Hmm, then

 That's somehow very

 Different. I think there will always be goods that we want to be scarce and expensive

 but it'll only be those goods that we want to be scarce and expensive that's in services that still are and

 So money in a world like that. I think it's just a it's a very curious idea. Hmm. Yeah, it becomes a different thing

 I mean, it's not a bag of gold and a leather pouch that you're carrying around not gonna do much good

 Probably it's not gonna do much good

 But then the question becomes how is that money distributed and how do we avoid some horrible Marxist society where there's one?

 Totalitarian government that just don't sit out. Yeah, that would be bad. I think you've got a like

 My current best idea and maybe there's something better is I think you act like if if we are right

 Lot of reasons we could be wrong

 but if we are right that like a the AGI systems of which there will be a few become the high-order bits of

 Sort of influence whatever in the world. I think you do need like

 Not to just redistribute the money but the access so that people can make their own decisions about how to use it and govern it

 And if you've got one idea you get to do this if I've got one idea I get to do that

 And I have like rights to basically do whatever I want with my part of it

 And if I come up with better ideas than you I get rewarded but for that by whatever the society is or vice versa

 Yeah

 You know the the hardliners the people that are against like welfare and against any sort of you G

 Universal basic income UBI what they're what they're really concerned with is human nature, right?

 They believe that if you remove incentives if you just give people free money, they become addicted to it

 they become lazy, but isn't that a human biological and psychological bottleneck and

 perhaps

 with the implementation of

 Artificial intelligence combined with some sort of neural interface whether it's external or internal

 It seems like that's a problem that can be solved that you can essentially

 And this is where it gets really spooky

 You can re-engineer the human biological system and you can remove all of these problems

 That people have that are essentially problems that date back to human reward systems when we were tribal people

 Hunter-gatherer people whether it's jealousy lust envy all these all these variables that come into play

 When you're dealing with money and status and social status

 If those are eliminated with technology and essentially we become a next

 Version of what the human species is possible. Like look, we're very very far removed from

 tribal brutal

 Societies of cave people we all agree that this is a way better way to live. It's it's it's it's it's way safer

 You know, we were like I was talking about this at my comedy club last night because we're because my wife was

 We're talking about

 DNA and my wife was saying that look everybody came from cave people which is kind of a fucked-up thought that everyone here is here

 because of cave people

 Well that all that's still in our DNA all that's still that and these

 Reward systems can be hijacked and they can be hijacked by just giving people money and like you don't have to work

 You don't have to do anything. You don't have to have ambition. You'll just have money and just just lay around and do drugs

 that's what the that's the fear that people have of giving people free money, but

 if we can figure out how to

 Literally engineer the human biological vehicle and

 remove all those pitfalls if we can

 Enlighten people

 Technologically, maybe in the lightness the wrong word, but but advance

 The human species to the point where those are no longer dilemmas because those are easily solvable

 through coding they're easily solvable through

 enhancing the human biological system perhaps raising dopamine levels to the point where anger and

 fear and hate are impossible they don't exist and

 If I mean if you just had everyone on Molly

 How many wars were there be there?

 Look, I think you're a war

 I mean, I think if you could get everyone on earth to all do Molly once on the same day

 That'd be a tremendous thing

 It would be if you got everybody on earth to do Molly every day

 That would be a real loss. But what if they did a low dose of Molly where you just get to ah

 Where everybody greets people with love and affection and there's no longer concern about competition

 Instead the concern is about the fascination of innovation and create creation and creativity

 Man we could talk the rest of the time about one topic. It's so interesting. I I think

 If I could like push a button to like remove all human striving and conflict I

 Wouldn't do it. First of all, like I think that's a very important part of our story and experience

 and and also I think we can see both from our own biological history and also from

 What we know about AI that very simple

 Goal systems fitness functions reward models, whatever you want to call it lead to incredibly

 impressive

 Results, you know if the biological imperative is survive and reproduce

 Look how far that has somehow gotten us as a society all of this all this stuff

 we have all this technology this building whatever else like

 That

 That got here through an

 extremely simple goal in a very complex environment leading to all of the richness and complexity of

 people

 Fulfilling this biological imperative to some degree and wanting to impress each other

 So I think like evolutionary fitness is a simple and unbelievably powerful idea now

 Could you carefully edit out every individual manifestation of that?

 Maybe but I I don't want to like live in a society of drones where everybody is just sort of like on

 Molly all the time either like

 That doesn't seem like the right answer. Like I want us to continue to strive

 I want us to continue to push back the frontier and go out and explore and I actually think

 something's already gotten a

 little off track in society

 about all of that and we're I

 Don't know I think like I'm I don't I

 Thought I'd be older by the time. I felt like the old guy complaining about the youth

 but I think we've lost something and I think that we

 Need more

 Striving maybe more risk-taking more like

 Explorer spirit. What do you mean by you think we've lost something? Um,

 I mean, here's like a version of it

 very much from my

 Own lens. I was a startup investor for a long time and

 It often was the case that the very best startup founders were in

 their early or mid 20s late 20s, maybe even and now they skew much older and

 What I want to know is in the world today

 Where the super great 25 year old founders and there are a few it's not fair to say there are none

 but there are less than there were before and

 I

 Think that's bad for society at all levels

 I mean like come to tech company founders is one example

 But like people who go off and create something new who push on a disagreeable or controversial idea. We need that to drive

 forward

 We need that sort of spirit. We need people to be able to you know, put out ideas and be wrong and

 Not be ostracized from society for it or not have it be like, you know

 Something that they get canceled for or whatever

 we need people to be able to take a risk in their career because they believe in

 Some important scientific quest that may not work out or may sound like really controversial or bad or whatever

 You know certainly when we started opening I and we were saying

 We think this AGI thing is is real and could be you know

 Could be done unlikely, but so important if it happens and all of the older scientists in our field were saying those people are irresponsible

 You shouldn't talk about AGI. That's like, you know, they're like selling a scam or they're like, you know, they're kind of

 Being reckless and it's gonna lead to an AGI winter like we said we believed we said at the time

 We knew it was unlikely, but it was an important quest and we were gonna go after it and kind of like fuck the haters

 That's important to a society

 What do you think is the origin like what why do you think there are less young people that are

 Doing those kind of things now as opposed to a decade or two ago. I

 Am so interested in that topic, um

 I'm tempted to blame the education system, but I sure that I think that like interacts with society

 In all of these strange ways

 It's funny there was this like thing all over my Twitter feed recently trying to talk about like what you know, what like

 What caused the drop in testosterone in American men over the last few decades and no one was like this is a symptom not a cause

 and

 Everyone was like, oh, it's the microplastics. It's the birth control pills. It's the whatever. It's the whatever. It's the whatever and I think this is like

 Not at all the most important

 Piece of this topic, but it was just interesting to me

 sociologically

 that

 There was there was only talk about it being

 About what what caused it not about it being enough an effect of some sort of change in society

 mmm

 But isn't what caused it. Well, there's biological

 Reasons why like when we talk about the phthalates and yeah microplastic pesticides

 Environmental factors those are real totally and I don't like again. I'm so far out of my depth and expertise here

 this was it was just interesting to me that the only talk was about like

 biological factors and now that somehow society can have

 Some sort of effect. Well society most certainly has an effect. Do you know what the answer to this is? I don't I mean

 I've had a podcast with dr

 Shanna Swan who wrote the book countdown and that is all about the introduction of petrochemical products and the correlating drop in

 testosterone rise in miscarriages the fact that these are ubiquitous endocrine disruptors that when they do

 Blood tests on people they find some insane number. It's like

 90 plus percent of people have phthalates in the system and

 You I appreciate the metal cups. Yeah, we we try to

 Mitigate it as much as possible. But I mean you're getting it if you're microwaving food, you're you're fucking getting it

 You're get you're just getting it you're getting eat processed food. You're getting it

 you're getting a certain amount of microplastics in your diet and

 Estimates have been that it's as high as a credit card of microplastics

 In your body you consume a credit card of that a week

 well, the real concern is with mammals because

 The introductions when they've done studies with mammals and they've introduced phthalates into their body

 There's a correlating

 One thing that happens is the these animals their taints shrink like the taint of them

 Yeah, the mammal when you look at males

 It's 50% to 100% larger than the females with the introduction of phthalates on the males the taints

 Start shrinking the penis is shrink the testicles shrink sperm count drinks

 so we know there's a direct biological connection between the

 This these chemicals and how they interact with with bodies

 So that's that's a real one and it's also

 The amount of petrochemical products that we have the amount of plastics that we use

 It's it is such an integral part of our culture and also our society our civilization

 It's everywhere and I've wondered

 if you think about how

 these

 Territorial apes

 Evolve into this new

 advanced species

 Wouldn't one of the very best ways

 Be to get rid of one of the things that causes the most problems, which is testosterone

 We need testosterone where we need aggressive men and protectors, but why do we need them?

 We need them because there's other aggressive men that are evil, right? So we need protectors from

 Ourselves. We need the good strong people to protect us from the bad strong people

 but if we're in the process of integrating with technology if

 Technology is an inescapable part of our life if it is everywhere you're using it

 You have the Internet of everything that's in your microwave in your

 television your computers everything you use as

 Time goes on that will be more and more part of your life

 And as these plastics are introduced into the human biological system

 You're seeing a feminization of the males of the species

 You're seeing a downfall in birth rate

 You're seeing all these correlating factors that would sort of lead us to become this more

 peaceful

 less violent less aggressive less ego driven thing

 Which the world is definitely becoming yeah time

 and

 I'm all for less violence, obviously

 But I don't

 Look obviously testosterone has many great things to say for it and some

 bad tendencies too, but I don't think a world if we if we leave that out of the equation and just say like a world that

 has a a

 Spirit that you know, we're gonna defend ourselves. We're going to

 We're going to find a way to like

 Protect ourselves and our tribe and our society into this future which you can get with lots of other ways

 I think that's an important impulse

 More than that though what I meant

 Is

 About if we go back to the issue of like where the young founders why don't we have why don't we have more of those?

 And I don't think it's just the tech startup industry

 I think you could say that about like young scientists or many other categories. Those are maybe just the ones that I know the best

 In a world with

 Any

 amount of technology I

 still think we we've got a it is our destiny in some sense to stay on this on this curve and

 we still need to go figure out what's next and after the next hill and after the next hill and

 it would be

 My perception is that there is some long-term societal change happening here and I think it makes us less happy to

 Right

 It may make us less happy. But what I'm saying is if the human species does integrate with technology

 Wouldn't a great way to facilitate that to be to kind of feminize

 the the primal apes and

 To sort of downplay the role you mean like the tech like should the AGI?

 Well, maybe it's a GI. I mean, maybe it's just an inevitable inevitable consequence of

 technology

 because especially the type of technology that we use which does have so much plastic in it and then on top of that the

 Technology that's involved in food systems preservatives all these different things that we use to make sure that people don't starve to death

 We've made incredible strides in that there are very few people in this country that starve to death

 Yeah, it is not it's not a primary issue, but violence

 Is a primary issue

 but our our concerns about violence are

 in our concerns about testosterone and strong men and powerful people is

 Only because we need to protect again. We need to protect against other that same thing

 Is that really the only reason sure? I mean how many like incredibly violent women are out there running gangs? No, no that part for sure

 Yeah

 What I meant more is is that the only reason that

 Society values like strong masculinity. Yeah, I think so

 I think it's a biological imperative, right?

 and I think that biological imperative is because we used to have to defend against incoming tribes and predators and animals and and

 We we needed someone who was stronger than most to defend the rest and like that's the concept of the military

 That's why Navy SEAL training is so difficult

 We want the strongest of the strong to be at the tip of the spear

 but that's only because there's people like that out there that are bad if

 general and artificial general intelligence and the implementation of some sort of a device that changes the

 Biological structure of human beings to the point where that is no longer a concern

 Like if you are me and I am you and I know this because of technology violence is impossible

 Yeah, look by the time if this goes all the way down the sci-fi path and we're all like merged into this one single like planetary

 Universal whatever consciousness then then then yes, you don't you don't need testosterone need testosterone

 But especially if we can reproduce through other methods

 Like this is the alien hypothesis, right?

 Like why do they look so spindly and without any gender and you know, when they have these big heads and tiny physical strength

 They don't need physical strength. They have some sort of a telepathic way of communicating

 they probably don't need sounds with their mouths and

 They don't need this

 urge that we have to conquer and to spread our DNA like that's so much of what people do is

 These reward systems that were established when we were territorial apes. There's a question to me about how much you can

 Ever get

 Rid of rid of that if you make an AGI and

 It decides actually we don't need to expand. We don't need more territory

 We're just like happy we at this point you me it the whole thing all together all motion. We're happy here on earth

 We don't need any bigger. We don't need to reproduce. We don't need to grow. We're just gonna sit here and run a

 That sounds like a boring life. I don't agree with that. I don't agree that that would be the logical conclusion

 I think the logical conclusion would be

 They would look for

 problems and

 frontiers that are

 insurmountable to our current existence like intergalactic communication and transportation

 What happens when it meets another AGI the other galaxy over what happens it meets an AGI

 That's a million years more advanced or that like what does that look like?

 Yeah, that's what I've often wondered if we are

 I call ourselves the biological caterpillars that create the electronic butterfly that we're making a cocoon right now

 We don't even know what we're doing. And I think it's also tied into

 consumerism

 Consider because what is consumerism do consumerism?

 Facilitates the creation of newer and better things because you always want the newest latest greatest

 so you have more advanced technology and automobiles and computers and cell phones and

 All of these different things including medical science

 That's all for sure true

 the thing I was like reflecting on as you were saying that is I don't think I

 I'm not as optimistic that we can or even should

 overcome our

 biological base to the degree that I think you think we can and

 You know to even go back one further level like I I think

 I think society is happiest

 Where there's like roles for strong femininity and strong masculinity in the same people and in different people

 and

 and I don't like

 And I don't think a lot of these like deep-seated things

 are

 Gonna be able to get pushed aside very easily and still have

 a

 System that works like sure

 We can't really think about what if there were consciousness in a machine someday or whatever what that would be like

 and maybe maybe I'm just like thinking too small-mindedly, but I think there is something

 About us that has worked in a super deep way and

 It took evolution a lot of search space to get here, but I wouldn't discount it too easily

 But don't you think that cave people would probably have those same logical conclusions

 About life and sedentary lifestyle and sitting in front of a computer and not interacting with each other except through text. Uh

 Well, I

 Mean, isn't that like what you're saying is correct?

 How different do you think our motivations are today and kind of what really brings us genuine?

 Joy, and how we're how we're wired at some deep level

 Differently than cave people clearly lots of other things have changed. We've got better much better tools. Mm-hmm

 But how different do you think it really is? I think

 That's the problem is that genetically at the base level?

 There's not much difference and that these reward systems are all

 There we interact with all of them whether it's ego. Yeah lust

 Yeah passion fury anger jealousy all these different things

 And you think will be some people will upload and edit those out. Yes

 Yeah, I think that our concern with losing this aspect of what it means to be a person

 This like the idea that we should always have conflict and struggle because conflict and struggle is how we facilitate progress

 Which is true right and combating evil is how the good gets greater and stronger if the good wins

 but my concern is that that is all predicated on the idea that the biological system that we have right now is

 correct and

 optimal and

 I think

 one of the things that we're dealing with with the heightened states of depression and anxiety and the lack of meaning and

 existential angst that people experience a lot of that is because

 the biological

 reality of being a human animal

 Doesn't really integrate that well with this world that we've created

 That's for sure. Yeah, and I wonder if

 The solution to that is not find ways

 to find meaning with the biological

 You know vessel that you've been given but rather

 engineer those aspects

 That are problematic out of the system

 To create a truly enlightened being like one of the things if you ask someone today

 What are the odds that in three years there will be no war in the world?

 That's zero like nobody thinks no

 There's never been a time in human history where we haven't had war if you had to say what is our number one?

 problem as a species

 Well, I would say our number one problem is is war our number one problem

 Is this idea that it's okay to send massive groups of people who don't know each other to go murder?

 massive groups of people that are somehow opposed because of the government because of

 Lines in the sand that's clearly the same thing. It's an insane thing

 How do you get rid of that?

 well

 one of the ways you get rid of that is to completely engineer out all the human reward systems that pertain to the

 acquisition of

 Resources so what's left at that point? Well, we're a new thing. I think we've become a new thing

 And what does that thing do want?

 I think that new thing would probably want to interact with other new things that are even more advanced than it. I

 do believe that

 Scientific curiosity can drive quite that that can be a great frontier. Mm-hmm for a long time

 Yeah, I think it can be a great frontier for a long time as well

 I just wonder if what we're seeing with the drop in testosterone

 The because of microplastics which sort of just snuck up on us

 We didn't even know that it was an issue until people started studying how certain is that at this point that that's what's happening

 I don't know study. It's it's a very good question. Dr. Shanna Swan believes that it's the primary driving factor of the

 sort of drop in testosterone and all miscarriage issues and

 Low birth weights that all those things seem to have a direct. There's it seems to be a direct factor

 Environmentally, I'm sure there's other factors to I'm the drop in testosterone

 I mean, it's it's been shown that you can increase males testosterone through resistance training and through making

 There's certain things you can do like one of the big ones they found through a study in Japan is cold water immersion

 before exercise, yeah

 Radically increases testosterone. So you could cold water immersion and then exercise. I wonder why yeah

 I don't make this you can find that

 but

 It's a it's a fascinating field of study

 But I think it has something to do with resilience and resistance and the fact that your body has to combat this

 External factor that's very extreme that causes the body to go into this state of

 deprivation and the the

 implementation of cold shock proteins and

 The reduction of inflammation which also enhances the body's endocrine system

 But then on top of that this imperative that you have to become more resilient to survive this

 External factor that you've introduced into your life every single day

 So there's ways

 Obviously that you can make a human being more robust

 You know, we know that we can do that through strength training and that all that stuff actually does raise testosterone

 your diet can raise testosterone and

 The a poor diet will lower it and will hinder your endocrine system will hinder your ability to produce

 growth hormone

 melatonin all these different factors

 That seems to be something that we can fix in terms or at least mitigate in term with decisions and choices and effort

 but the fact that these petrochemical product like there's a graph that dr. Shannon Swan has in her book that shows

 During the 1950s when they start using petrochemical products and everything microwave plastics saran wrap all this different stuff

 There's a direct correlation

 Between the implementation and the dip and it all seems to line up like that seems to be a primary factor

 Does that have an equivalent impact on

 Like estrogen related hormones. That's a good question

 Some of them actually I know some of these chemicals that they're talking about actually increase and estrogen in men

 I don't know but I do know that it increases miscarriages

 So I just think it's overall

 Disruptive to the definitely a societal wide

 Disruption of the endocrine system. Yeah in a short period of time. Yeah, it's like a just

 Madden sure difficult to wrap our heads and then pollutants and

 Environmental toxins on top of the pesticides and herbicides and all these other things in microplastics

 There's a lot of factors that are leading our systems to not work. Well

 But I just

 Really wonder if this like are we just clinging on to this monkey body? Are we deciding?

 I like my monkey body. I do too. Listen, I love it

 but I'm also I try to be very objective and when I

 objectively look at it in terms of like if you take where we are now and all of our problems and you look towards the

 future and like

 What would be one way that you could mitigate a lot of these and well it would be the implementation of some sort of a telepathic

 technology where

 You know

 You couldn't just text someone or tweet at someone something mean because you would literally feel

 What they feel when you put that energy out there and you would you would be repulsed. Yeah, and and then

 violence would be if you were committing violence on someone and

 You literally felt the reaction of that violence in your own being

 And you know, you would also have no motivation for violence if we had no

 aggressive tendencies no primal chimpanzee tendencies, you know, it's it's true that

 violence in the world has obviously gone down a lot over the decades, but

 Emotional violence is up a lot and the internet has been horrible for that

 Yeah, like I don't walk I'm not gonna walk over there and punch you because you're look like a big strong guy

 You're gonna punch me back and also there's a societal convention not to do that

 but if I didn't know you I might like send a mean tweet about you and I feel nothing on that yeah, and

 Clearly that has become like a mega epidemic in society that we did not evolve the biological

 Constraints on somehow yeah, and

 I'm actually very

 Worried about how much that's already destabilized Dustin made us all miserable

 It's certainly accentuated it it's exacerbated all of our problems

 It's I mean if you read Jonathan hates book the cotton of the American mind of your great book

 Yeah, it's great book and it's it's very damaging to women particularly young girls young girls growing up

 There's a direct correlation between the invention of social media the introduction to the iPhone

 self-harm suicide

 online bullying

 You know like people have always talked shit about people when no one's around

 I think the fact that they're doing it now openly to harm people

 Horrible obviously I think it's super damaging to men too

 Maybe they just like talk about it less, but I don't think any of us are like yeah set up for this

 No, no one set up for it, and you know I think famous people know that more than anyone we all get used to it

 Yeah, you just get numb to it and or if you're wise you don't engage. You know I don't engage

 I don't even have any apps on my new phone. Yeah, I've decided I got a new phone, and I said okay nothing

 That's really smart no Twitter

 I saw I have a separate phone that if I have to post someone up something I pick up

 But all I get on my new phone is text messages

 And is that more just to like keep your mind pure and yeah, not tempt myself

 You know many fucking times I've got up to go to the bathroom first thing in the morning and spent an hour

 Just sitting on the toilet scrolling through Instagram like for nothing does zero for me

 And there's this thought that I'm gonna get something out of it. I was thinking actually just yesterday about how

 you know we all have talked for so long about these algorithmic feeds are gonna manipulate us in these big ways and

 That will happen, but in the small ways already we're like scrolling Instagram is not even that

 Fulfilling like you finish that hour, and you're like I know that was a waste of my time

 But it was like over the threshold where you couldn't quite

 It's hard to put the phone down right you just hoping that the next one's gonna be interesting and every now and then the problem

 Is every like 30th or 40th real that I click on is wild

 I wonder by the way if that's more powerful than if everyone was wild if everyone was great sure

 You know it's like the slime mine for gold. Yeah, you don't just go out and pick it like daisies

 If the algorithm is like intentionally feeding you some shit along the way yeah

 Well, there's just a lot of shit out there unfortunately

 But it's all it's just in terms. You know I was talking to

 Sean O'Malley who's this UFC fighter who's you know obviously it was a very strong mind really interesting guy

 But one of the things that Sean said is like I get this like low-level

 Anxiety yeah from scrolling through things, and I don't know why like what is that?

 And I think it's part of the logical mind realizes. This is a massive waste of your resources

 I also deleted a bunch of that stuff off my phone

 Because I just didn't have the self-control

 I mean I had the self-control to delete it, but like not to stop once I was growing right yeah, and so I I

 think we're just like

 Yeah, we're getting attention hacked in some ways

 There's some good to it too, but we don't yet have the stuff in place

 The tools the societal norms whatever to modulate it well right and we're not designed for it

 So this is a completely new technology that again hijacks our human reward systems and hijacks

 all of the

 checks and balances that are in place for communication which

 Historically has been one-on-one

 Historically communication has been one person to another and when people write letters to each other

 It's generally things like if someone likes a love letter or you know they miss you like yeah

 They're writing this thing where they're kind of exposing a thing that maybe they have a difficulty and expressing in front of you

 And it was not it did you know generally unless the person was a psycho. They're not hateful letters

 Whereas the ability to just communicate fuck that guy. I hope he gets hit by a bus is so simple and easy and

 And you don't experience Twitter seems to be particularly horrible for this. Yeah the mechanics work

 Yeah, it really rewards in ways that I don't think anybody fully understands that like taps into something about human psychology

 yeah, where but that's kind of like

 That's how you get engagement that's how you get like followers that's how you get what like, you know, the dopamine hits or whatever and

 Like the people who I know that spend all day on Twitter more of them are unhappy about it than happy

 Oh, yeah, they're the most unhappy

 I mean

 there's quite a few people that I follow that I only follow because they're crazy and then I'll go and check in on them and

 See what the fuck they're tweeting about and some of them are on there eight ten hours a day

 I'll see tweets all day long and I know that person cannot be happy

 They're unhappy and they cannot stop you can't stop and it seems like

 It's their life. It's it's a and they get they get meaning out of it in terms of

 Reinforcement, you know, they get short-term. Yeah

 So you get they I think maybe each day you go to bed feeling like you accomplished something and got your dopamine and the end

 Of each decade you probably were like where'd that decade go?

 I was talking to a friend of mine who was having a real problem with it

 He's saying he would be literally walking down the street and he'd have to check his phone to see who's replying

 And he wasn't even looking where he's walking

 It was just like caught up in the anxiety of these exchanges and it's not because of the nice things people say no

 No, no, no, it's all and with him. He was recognizing that, you know, he was dunking on people and then yes seeing yeah

 Yeah, yeah to the dunking and yeah, I stopped doing that a long time ago

 I stopped interacting with people on Twitter in a negative way. I just won't do it

 Yeah, just even if I disagree with someone I'll say something. I have like as possible

 I have like more of an internet troll streak than I would like to admit

 And so I try to just like not give myself too much of an impatient, but I slip up sometimes. Yeah, it's so

 Tempting totally it's so tempting - and it's fun. It's fun to say something shitty

 I mean again, whatever this biological system we were talking about earlier that get that that gets a positive reward

 Well, it get moment. There's a react and you know, there's reactions

 you say something outrageous and someone's going to react and that reaction is like energy and there's

 There's all these other human beings engaging with your idea

 but

 Ultimately, it's just not productive

 for most people and it's psychologically

 it's just

 Fraught with peril. There's just so much going on. I don't know anybody ages all day long. That's happy. I

 certainly not I don't like I

 Mean I think I've watched it like destroy is too strong of a word but like

 knock off track the careers or life's or happiness or human relationships of

 People that are like good smart conscientious people. Yeah, just like got couldn't fight this demon

 yeah, like hacked there and Kovac really accentuated that because people were alone and isolated and that made it even worse because

 then they felt

 They felt even better saying shitty things to people. I'm unhappy. Yeah

 Yeah, worse things about you and then there was a psychological aspect of it like the angst that came from being

 socially isolated and terrified about this invisible disease it's gonna kill us all and

 You know and that so you have is like and then you're interacting with people on Twitter

 And then you're caught up in that anxiety and you're doing it all day

 And I know quite a few people especially comedians that really lost their minds

 Yeah, and lost the respect to their peers by doing that. I have a lot of sympathy for people who lost their minds during Kovac because

 What a natural thing for us all to go through and isolation was just brutal

 But a lot of people did and I don't think the Internet

 In particularly not the kind of like social dynamics of things like Twitter. I don't think that like brought out anyone's best

 No, well, I mean some people I think if they're they're not they're not inclined to be shitty to people

 I think some people did seek comfort and they did interact with people in positive ways

 Yeah, I see. There's plenty of positive. I think the thing is that the negative interactions are so much more

 Impactful. Yeah. I look I think there are a lot of people who use these systems for wonderful things

 I didn't mean to imply that's not the case, but that's not what drives

 People's emotions after getting off the platform in the right of the day, right, right

 And it's also probably not if you looked at a pie chart of the amount of interactions on

 Twitter I would say a lot of them are shitting on people and being angry about how many of the people

 That you know that use Twitter those eight or ten hours a day are just saying wonderful things about other people all day versus the virulent

 Very few. Yeah, very few. I don't know any of them. I know

 But then again, I wonder

 with the implementation of

 some new technology that makes communication a very different thing that will occur you like what we're doing now with communication is

 Less immersive than communicating one-on-one you and I are talking. We're looking into each other's eyes. We're getting social cues

 We're smiling at each other. We're laughing. It's it's a very natural way to talk. I

 wonder if through the implementation of technology if

 It becomes even more

 immersive than a one-on-one conversation

 Even more interactive and eat you will understand even more about the way a person feels about what you say

 About that person's memory that person's life that person's history

 Their education how it comes out of their mind

 How their mind interacts with your mind and you see them you really see them

 I wonder of that I wonder if what we're experiencing now is

 Just like the first time people invented guns. They just are shooting at things, you know

 Yeah, if you can like feel what I feel when you say something mean to me or nice to me

 We're like that's clearly gonna change

 What you decide to say yes. Yeah. Yeah, unless you're a psycho unless you're a psycho and then what?

 Causes someone to be a psycho and can that be engineered out?

 Imagine what we're talking about

 When we're dealing with the human mind we're dealing with various diseases

 bipolar schizophrenia

 imagine a

 world where we can find the root cause of those things and

 through

 coding and some sort of an implementation and implementation of technology that

 elevates dopamine and serotonin and and does some things to people that eliminates all of those problems and

 Allows people to communicate in a very pure way

 It sounds great, it sounds great, but you're not gonna have any rock and roll you'll stand up comedy will die

 You have no violent movies, you know, there's a lot of things that are gonna go out the window

 But maybe that is also part of the process of our evolution to the next stage of existence

 Maybe I feel genuinely confused on this. Well, I think you should be I mean to be we're gonna find out

 Yeah, I mean to be sure that was good. That's the same but I don't even have like hubris beyond belief, right?

 I mean you just you

 From the when did open AI when did you first start this project?

 are like the very beginning and end of 2015 early 2016 and

 When you initially started this project

 What kind of timeline did you have in mind and has it stayed on that timeline?

 Or is it just wildly out of control? I?

 Remember talking

 With John Shulman one of our co-founders early on and he was like, yeah

 I think it's gonna be about a 15-year project and I was like, yeah, it sounds about right to me and

 I've always sort of thought since then now I no longer think of like AGI is quite the end point

 But to get to the point where we like accomplish the thing we set out to accomplish

 You know that would take us to like 2030 2031 that has felt to me like all the way through kind of a

 Reasonable estimate with huge error bars and I kind of think we're on the trajectory I sort of would have assumed and

 What did you think the impact?

 On society would be like did you when you when you first started doing this and you said, okay if we are successful

 And we do create some

 massively advanced AGI

 What what is the implementation and how what is the impact on society?

 Have did you did you sit there and have like a graph like you had the pros on one side the cons on the other?

 Did you just sort of abstractly consider? Well?

 We definitely talked a lot about the cons, you know

 Many of us were super worried about and still are about

 Safety and alignment and if we build these systems we can all see the great future

 That's easy to imagine. But if something goes horribly wrong, it's like really horribly wrong

 and so there was a lot of discussion about and really a

 Big part of the founding spirit of this is like, how are we gonna solve this safety problem?

 What does that even mean?

 One of the things that we believe is that the greatest minds in the world cannot sit there and solve that in a vacuum

 You've got to like have contact reality. You've got to see where the technology goes

 practice plays out in a stranger way than theory and that's certainly proven true for us, but

 we had a long list of

 well, I don't get a long list of cons we had a very

 intense list of cons because you know, there's like all of the last decades of sci-fi telling you about

 How this goes wrong. Yeah, I was to shoot me right now. Yeah

 And I'm sure you've seen the John Connor chat GPT. I haven't means it

 It's it's like, you know, John Connor from the Terminator the kid looking at you when you open up chat GPT

 Yeah, so

 That stuff we were like very clear in our minds on now

 I think we understand there's a lot of work to do but we understand more about how to make AI safe in the

 AI safety gets overloaded like, you know

 Does it mean don't say so many people find offensive or does it mean not don't destroy all of humanity or some?

 continuum and I think

 The word is like gotten overloaded but in terms of the like not destroy all of humanity version of it

 We have a lot of work to do but I think we have

 Finally more ideas about what can work and and given the way the systems are going we have a lot more

 opportunities available to us to solve it than I thought we would have

 Given the direction that we initially thought the technology was going to go so that's good on the positive side

 The thing that I was most excited about then and remain most excited about now is

 What if this system can?

 dramatically

 increase the rate of scientific knowledge in society

 that is a I think that kind of like all

 Real sustainable economic growth the future getting better

 progress in some sense comes from

 increased scientific and technological capacity

 And so we can solve all the problems and if the AI can help us do that

 That's always been the thing. I've been most excited about

 Well, it certainly seems like that is the greatest potential greatest positive potential of AI

 It is to solve a lot of the problems that human beings have had forever a lot of the societal problems

 That seemed to be I mean, that's what I was talking about an AI president

 I'm kind of not joking because I feel like if something was

 hyper-intelligent and aware of all the variables with no human bias and no incentives no

 other than here's your program the greater good for the community of the United States and

 The greater good for that community as it interacts with the rest of the world

 The elimination of these

 dictators these whether they're

 elected or non elected who impose their will on the population because

 they have a vested interest in protecting special interest groups and and

 industry, I think I think as long as

 the thing that I find scary when you say that is it does it feels like it's

 humanity not in control and I reflexively don't like that, but if it's

 if it if it's in if it's instead like it is the collective will of humanity being expressed without the

 Translation and corrupting influences along the way. Yeah, then I can see it. Is that possible? It seems like it would be

 it seems like if it was programmed in that regard to do the greater good for humanity and

 And take into account the values of humanity the needs of humanity

 There's something about the phrase do the greater good for you. I know it's terrifying. It's very Orwellian all of it

 But also so is artificial general intelligence sure for sure open the door

 I wish I wish I had worked on you know, something that was less morally fraught

 But do you cuz you know, I'm I mean I can't imagine it

 I cannot imagine a cooler thing to work on I feel unbearably I feel like the luckiest person on earth. That's awesome. It is not

 It's not on easy mode, let's say that oh, yeah, this is not life on easy mode. No, no, no. No, I mean you are at the

 forefront of one of the most spectacular changes in human history and I would say

 as

 No, I would say more spectacular than the implementation of the Internet

 I think the implement the implementation of the Internet was the first baby steps of

 This and that artificial general intelligence is yeah, it is the Internet on steroids

 It's the the Internet in you know hyperspace

 What I would say is it's it's the next step and there'll be more steps after but it's our most exciting step yet

 Yeah, my wonder is what are those next steps after isn't that so exciting to think about it's very exciting

 I think we're the last people I

 Really do. I think we're the last of the biological people with all the biological problems. I think there's a

 Very excited about that. I

 Just think that's just what it is. You're just fine with it is what it is, you know, I mean

 That I don't think you can control it at this point other than some massive natural disaster that resets us back to the Stone Age

 Which is also something we should be very concerned with

 Yes, it seems like that happens a lot. We're not aware of it because the timeline of a human body is so small

 You know the timeline of the human existence as a person is a hundred years if you're lucky

 But yet the timeline of the earth is billions of years and if you look at how many times

 Life on earth has been reset by comets

 slamming into the earth and just

 completely eliminating all

 Technological advancement. It seems like it's happened multiple times in recorded history. I

 Do think I always think we don't think about that quite enough

 We talked about the simulation hypothesis earlier

 It's had this big resurgence and in the tech industry recently one of the things

 One of the new takes on it as we get closer to AGI is that you know

 If ancestors were simulating us the time they'd want to simulate again and again is right up to the you know

 Right up right the lead up to the creation of AGI. Yeah, so it seems very crazy. We're living through this time

 It's not a coincidence at all

 You know

 This is the time that is after

 We had enough cell phones out in the world like recording tons of video to train the video model of the world

 that's all being like jacked into us now via brain implants or whatever and before

 Everything goes really crazy with AGI and it's also this interesting time to simulate like can we get through?

 Does the asteroid come right before we get there for dramatic tension? Like do we figure out how to make this safe?

 Do we figure out a societally agree on it?

 So that's led to like a lot more people believe in it than before. I think mmm. Yeah for sure and

 Again I think this is just where it's going

 I mean, I don't know if that's a good thing or a bad thing

 It's just a thing but it's certainly better to live now

 I would not want to live in the 1800s and be in a covered wagon trying to make my way across the country

 Yeah, we got the most exciting time in history yet. It's the best

 It's the best but it's also has the most problems the most social problems the the most

 awareness of social environmental

 Infrastructure the the issue we have to go solve them. Yeah

 and I

 Intuitively, I think I feel something

 Somewhat different than you which is I think humans in something close to this form are gonna be around

 For a lot longer than I don't think we're the last humans how long do you think we have?

 Like longer than a time frame I can reason about really now there may be like I could totally imagine a world where some people

 decide to merge and go off exploring the universe with

 AI and there's a big universe out there

 But like can I really imagine a world where short of a natural disaster?

 There are not humans pretty similar to humans from today on

 earth doing human like things and

 The sort of spirit of humanity merged into these other things that are out there doing their thing in the universe

 It's very hard for me to actually

 See that happening and maybe that means I'm like gonna turn out to be a dinosaur and lot

 I am horribly wrong in this prediction, but I would say I feel it more over time as we make progress with AI not less

 Yeah, I don't feel that at all. I feel like we're done in like a few years

 No, maybe a generation or two. It'll probably be a gradual change like wearing of clothes

 You know, I don't think everybody wore clothes and they invented clothes

 I think it probably took a while when someone figured out shoes

 I think that probably took a while when they figured out structures doors houses cities

 Agriculture all those things were slowly implemented over time and then now become everywhere

 And I think this is far more transformative and it's part of that because you don't think there'll be an option for some people

 Not to merge right just like there's not an option for some people to not have telephones anymore

 It's it like I used to have friends like I don't even have email those those two people don't exist anymore

 They all have email right? Everyone has a phone at least a flip phone

 I know some people that they just can't handle social media and all that jazz. They went to a flip phone good

 I I don't know if this is true or not

 I've heard you can't like walk into an AT&T store anymore and still buy a flip phone. I heard that just changed you can

 Oh, really someone gave me this but I don't know if it's Verizon still has them. I was just there

 Hey, they still have flip phones. I was like, I like it

 I like this fucking little thing that you just call people and I always like romanticize about going to that

 But my step was to go to a phone that has nothing on it with text messages and that's been a few days

 Feeling good so far. Yeah, it's good

 You know, I still have my other phone that I use for social media

 but when I pick that motherfucker up I start scrolling through YouTube and watching videos and

 scrolling through tick-tock or Instagram and I don't have tick-tock but I've I have I tried threads for a little while but

 fucking ghost town

 Right back to X. I I live on a ranch during the weekends and there's no Wi-Fi in the house

 But there's no cell phone coverage anywhere else. Mmm

 and

 It's

 Every week I forget how nice it is and what a change it is to go for a walk

 Yeah, no cell phone coverage. It's good for your mind for it's

 Unbelievable for your mind and I think we have like so quickly lost something. Mm-hmm

 Like out of service just doesn't happen that doesn't have an airplanes anymore. You know, like

 but that

 Like hours where your phone just cannot buzz. Yeah, no text message either nothing. I

 Think that's a really healthy thing

 I dropped my phone once when I was in Lanai and I think it was the last time I dropped the phone

 The phone was like we're done and it just started calling people randomly

 Like it would just call people and I'd hang it up and call another person

 I'd hang it up and I was showing my wife. I was like, look at this. This is crazy

 It's just calling people and so the phone was broken. And so I had an order a phone and we were on vacation for like eight

 days and

 It took three days for Apple to get me a phone. You had a great three days. It was amazing

 It was amazing because when I was hanging out with my family, I was totally present

 There's no options and I wasn't thinking about checking my phone because it didn't exist. I didn't have one and there was a

 Mediation of again what would Sean was talking about that low level of anxiety this sort of like

 That you have when you always want to check your phone, yeah, I think I

 Think that thing it's so bad. We have not figured out yet

 Like the technology has moved so fast biology moves very slowly. We have not figured out how we're gonna function in this society and

 Get those occasional times when you know, your phone is broken for three days. Yeah, or you go for a walk with no service, but

 it's like I

 Very much feel like my phone controls me not the other way around. Uh-huh, and I hate it

 But I haven't figured out what to do about it. Well, that's what I'm worried about with future technology

 Is that this which was so unanticipated?

 If you'd imagine a world when you imagine going up to someone

 In 1984 and pointing to a phone and saying one day that'll be in your pocket. It's gonna ruin your life like what?

 But yeah, one day people are gonna be jerking off to that thing

 You're like what one day people are gonna be watching people get murdered on Instagram

 I was he so many murders on Instagram over the last few months. Really?

 I've never seen a bit of bad timeline me and my friend Tom Segura

 Every morning we text each other the worst things that we find on Instagram. Why for fun? He's a comedian. Okay, both comedians

 That's fun to you. Yeah, this is fucking all right, just ridiculous

 I mean, I mean just crazy car accidents people get gored by bulls and like every like we try to top each other

 So every day he's setting me the most every day when I wake up and I check Tom fuck

 What do you know? Can you explain what's fun about that? Well?

 He's a comic and I'm a comic and comics like chaos. We like we like ridiculous

 Outrageous shit that is just so far beyond the norm of what you experience in a regular day

 just and also the

 understanding of the wide

 Spectrum of human behavior if you're a nice person and you surround yourself with nice people you very rarely see someone get shot

 You very rarely see

 People get stabbed for no reason randomly on the street, but on Instagram you see that every day

 and

 There's something about that. We're just reminds you. Oh

 The we're crazy like the the human species like there's a certain percentage of us that are just off the rails

 And just out there

 Wow, just causing chaos and jumping dirt bikes and landing on your neck and all that stuff

 Yeah, even to hear that makes me like yeah physically like I know that happens of course. Mm-hmm

 And I know like not looking at it doesn't make it not happen, right?

 But it makes me so uncomfortable and I'm happy to watch. Oh, yeah, it makes me uncomfortable too. But yeah, we do it to each other

 every day

 And it's not good

 It's definitely not good, but it's also I'm not gonna stop. It's fun

 But why is it fun? It's fun because it's my friend Tom and we're both kind of the same in that way

 Which just look at that. Look at this that I got look at this and it's just a thing

 We started doing a few months ago. It's just can't stop and

 Instagram has like learned that you do that. So just keep showing you more and more Instagram knows when I my search page is a mess

 When I go to the discover stuff, oh, it's just crazy. But the thing is it shows up in your feed, too

 That's what I understand about the algorithm. It shows it knows you're fucked up

 So it shows up in your feed of things like even if they're they're not people I follow

 But Instagram shows them to me

 Anyway, I heard an interesting thing a few days ago by Instagram and the feed which is if you use it at off hours

 When they have more processing capability available because less people are using it you get better recommendations

 So your feet will be better in like the middle of the night. What is better though?

 Doesn't your feed more addictive to you or whatever, right? So for me better would be more murders more animal attacks

 It's horrible. It's but it's just it seems to know that's what I like

 It seems to know that that's what I interact with. So it's just sending me that most of the time

 Yeah, that probably has all kinds of crazy psychological I'm sure yeah, I'm sure that's also one of the reasons

 Why I want to get rid of it and move away from it. Yeah, so maybe maybe maybe it went too far

 I don't even know if it's too far. But what it is is it's showing me

 the darker regions of

 society of

 Civilization of human behavior, but you think we're about to edit all that out. I wonder if that is a solution

 I really do because I don't think it's outside the realm of possibility

 If we really truly can engineer that like one of the talks about neural link, that's really promising is

 people with spinal cord issues

 Injuries people that can't move their body and

 to being able to hotwire that where

 Essentially it controls all these parts of your body that you couldn't control anymore

 And so that would be an amazing thing for people that are injured for amazing thing for people that are

 You know, they're they're paralyzed. They have all sorts of neurological conditions

 That that is probably one of the first and that's what Elon's talked about as well when the first

 implementations the restoration of sight, you know

 cognitive function enhanced from people that have brain issues

 That's tremendously exciting. Yeah, and like many other technologies, I don't think we can stop neural interfaces

 Nor because of the like great good that's gonna happen along the way, but I don't think we know where it goes

 It's Pandora's box for sure

 And I think when we open it, it's just we're not gonna go back

 Just like we're not gonna go back to no computers without some for sure natural disaster, by the way

 I and I mean, this is a great compliment. You are one of the most neutral people I have ever heard

 Talk about the merge coming. You're just like yeah, I think it's gonna happen. You know, it's be good in these ways bad in these ways

 but

 you seem like

 Unbelievably neutral about it, which is always something I admire

 I try to be as neutral about everything as possible except for corruption

 Which I think it's just like one of the most massive problems with the the way our culture is

 Governed I think corruption is just and the influence of money's it's just a giant terrible issue

 but in terms of like social issues and in terms of

 The way human beings believe and think about things. I try to be as neutral as possible because I think

 The only way to really truly understand the way other people think about things is try to look at it through their mind

 and if you have this inherent bias and this

 You have this

 Like very rigid view of what's good and bad and right and wrong

 I don't think that serves you very well for understanding why people differ

 So I try to be as neutral and as objective as possible when I look at anything

 This is a skill that I've learned is not something I had in 2009 when I started this podcast

 This podcast I started just fucking around with friends and I had no idea what it was

 I mean, there's no way I could have ever known and

 But also had no idea

 What it was gonna do to me and as far as the evolution of me as a human being I am so much nicer

 I'm so much more aware of things. I'm so much more

 Conscious of the way other people think and feel I'm just a totally different person than I was in

 2009 which is hard to

 Reckon, that's hard to believe. That's really cool. And then but if that it's just an

 inevitable consequence of this

 unexpected

 Education that I've received did the empathy kind of like come on linearly. Yes, and that was not a no

 It just came it came on recognize. Well, first of all came on recognizing that

 The interact the negative interactions on social media that I was doing. They didn't help me

 They didn't help the person and then having compassion for this person that's fucked up or done something stupid

 Like this doesn't it's not good to just dunk on people

 Like it's a there's no benefit there other than to give you some sort of social credit and get a bunch of likes

 It didn't make me feel good. Like that's not good

 and also a lot of psychedelics a

 ton of psychedelic experiences from 2009 on and with everyone a greater understanding of the impact like I had one recently and

 When I had the one recently like the overwhelming

 Message that I was getting through this was that?

 Everything I say and do

 ripples off into all the people that I

 interact with and then if I'm not doing something with at least the goal of

 overall good or overall understanding

 That I'm doing bad and that that bad is a real thing as much as you try to ignore it because you don't interface with

 it instantly and

 You're still

 creating unnecessary negativity and

 That I should avoid that as much as possible. It's like a

 overwhelming message that this cycle this psychedelic experience was giving me and

 And I took it because I was just

 particularly anxious that day about the state of the world particularly anxious about Ukraine and

 Russia and China and the the political system that we have in this country and this

 incredibly

 Polarizing way that the left and the right engage with each other and God just it just seems so

 just

 Tormented and so I was just

 Some days I just get I think too much about it. I just I'm like I need something

 Yeah, crack me out of this. So I I took these psychedelics

 Are you surprised psychedelic therapy has not made?

 From what you thought would happen in the or say the early 2010s tone

 Are you surprised it has not made more progress sort of on a path to legalization as a medical treatment?

 No, no

 I'm not because there's a lot of people that don't want it to be in place and those people have tremendous power over our medical

 system and over a regulatory system and

 Those people have also not experienced these psychedelics

 There's very few people that have experienced profound psychedelic experiences that don't think there's an overall good for those things

 So your problem is you're having

 these laws and these rules

 implemented by people who are completely ignorant about the positive effects of these things and

 if you know the history of

 psychedelic

 Prohibition in this country it all took place during

 1970 and it was really to stop the civil rights movement and it was really to stop the anti-war movement and they they tried to

 Find a way to make all these things that these people were doing that was causing them to thinking these very different ways

 This tune in turn on drop out that they just wanted to put a fucking halt to that

 What better way to lock everyone who participates in that in cages?

 Find that people are producing it lock them in cages put them in jail for the rest of their life

 Make sure it's illegal arrest people put the bus on television

 Make sure that people are aware and then there's also you connect it to drugs that are inherently dangerous for society and detrimental

 The fentanyl crisis, you know the crack cocaine crisis that we experienced in the 90s like all of those things

 They're under the blanket of drugs

 Psychedelic drugs are also talked about like drugs, even though they have these profound

 spiritual and psychological changes that they

 You know in by the I remember when I was in elementary school and I was in like drug education. They talked about you know

 Marijuana is really bad because it's a gateway to these other things and there's this bad one that bad one heroin whatever and the very end

 Of the line the worst possible thing is LSD

 Did you take LSD and go oh they're lying it's like a like therapy

 was definitely one of the like most important things in my life and I I

 assumed given how

 powerful it was for me like I

 you know, I struggled with like all kinds of anxiety and other negative things and to like watch all of that go away and

 Like that like I traveled to another country for like a week did a few things came back

 Totally different person. Yeah, it's like I've been lied to my whole life. Yeah

 I'm so grateful that this happened to me now talked a bunch of other people all similar experiences

 I assume this was a while ago

 I assumed it was and I was like, you know very interested in what was happening in the US

 I was like

 Particularly like looking at where MDMA and psilocybin were on the path and I was like, alright

 this is gonna get through like this is and this is gonna like change the mental health of

 A lot of people in a really positive way and I am surprised we have not made faster progress there

 But I'm still optimistic. We will well we have made so much progress

 from the time of the 1990s in the 1990s

 You never heard about psychedelic retreats. You never heard about people taking these vacations

 You never heard about people getting together in groups and doing these things and coming back with these profound

 Experiences that they relate to other people and literally seeing people change

 Seeing who they are change seeing people become less less selfish less

 Toxic less mean, you know you and and more empathetic and more understanding. Yeah, it's I

 Mean I can only talk about it from a personal experience

 It's been a radical change in my life as well as again having all these conversations with different people

 I feel so fortunate to be able to do this that I've had so many different conversations with so many different people that think so differently

 and so many exceptional people that have accomplished so many incredible things and you get to sort of

 Understand the way their mind works and the way they see the world the way they interface with things. It's awesome

 It's pretty fucking cool. And that is one of the cooler things about being a human that you can find a way to

 Mitigate all the negative aspects of the monkey body and that there are tools that are in place

 but unfortunately in this very prohibitive society this society of

 prohibition we were

 Denied those and we're denied ones that have never killed anybody which is really bizarre when you know

 Nancy Cotton can still be prescribed. What's the deal with why we can't

 make

 If we leave like why we can't get these medicines that have transformed people's lives like more available

 What's the deal with why we can't stop the the opioid crisis or like?

 Oh, it seems like just an unbelievable crisis first, San Francisco

 You remember when the beginning of the conversation we said that AI

 Will do a lot of good overall good, but also not no harm if we

 legalize drugs all drugs

 That would do the same thing. Would you advocate to legalize all drugs? It's a very complicated

 Question because I think you're gonna have a lot of addicts that wouldn't be addicts

 You're gonna have a lot of people's lives destroyed because it's legal. There's a lot of people that may not be

 Psychologically capable of handling things. Maybe they already have like that's the thing about

 Psychedelics they do not ever recommend them for people that have a slippery grasp on reality as it is

 people that are struggling people that are already on a bunch of medications that allow them just keep a steady state of

 existence in the normal world if you just fucking bombard them with psilocybin who

 Knows what kind of an effect that's gonna have and whether or not they're psychologically too fragile to recover from that

 I mean, there's many many stories of people taking too much acid and never coming back

 Yeah. Yeah, these are like

 A powerful doesn't seem to like begin to cover it, right? Yeah, but there's also

 What is it about humans that are constantly looking to perturb their normal state of consciousness?

 Constantly whether it's we're both drinking coffee

 You know people smoke cigarettes. They they they do all they take Adderall

 They do all sorts of different things to change and enhance their normal state of consciousness

 It seems like whether it's meditation or yoga. They're always doing something

 yeah, but try to get out of their own way or get in their own way or

 distract themselves from the pain of existence and

 It's it seems like a normal part of humans and even monkeys like vervet monkeys get addicted to alcohol

 They get addicted to fermented fruits and alcohol and they become drunks and alcoholics

 It just it's it's what do you think is the deep lesson there? Well, we're not happy

 Exactly, you know

 We're and then some things can make you happy sort of for like a couple of drinks makes you so happy

 For a little bit until you're an alcoholic until you destroy your liver until you crash your car until you're you know

 You're involved in some sort of a violent encounter that you would never be involved with if you weren't drunk

 You know, I love caffeine

 Which clearly is a drug

 Alcohol like I like but I often am like and this is like, yeah, you know

 this is like dolling me and I wish I hadn't had this drink and

 then other stuff like I

 Mostly would choose to avoid

 But that's because you're smart. Um

 And you're probably aware of the pros and cons and and you're also probably aware of how it affects you

 And what's doing good for you and what is detrimental to you?

 But that's a decision that you can make as an informed human being that you're not allowed to make if everything's illegal, right?

 Yeah, right and also when things are illegal

 Criminals sell those things because it's you're not tampering the desire by making it illegal

 You're just making access to it much more complicated. What I was gonna say is if fentanyl is really great. I don't want to know

 Apparently it is apparently it is. Yeah, Peter Berg was on the podcast and he produced that painkiller documentary for Netflix

 Yeah, the the docudrama about the Sackler family. It's an amazing piece

 But he said that he took

 Oxycontin once recreationally and it was like, oh my god, it's amazing

 He's like keep this away from me. It feels so good. Yeah, and that's part of the problem. Is it? Yeah, it will wreck your life

 Yeah, it will it will capture you but it's just so unbelievable

 But the feeling like what how did Lenny Bruce describe it? I think he described heroin as getting a warm hug from God

 No, I think the feeling that it gives you is probably pretty spectacular. I

 don't know if

 Realizing that is gonna solve the problems

 But I do know that

 Another problem that we're not paying attention to is the rise of the cartels and that fact that right across our border where you can walk

 There are these

 enormous

 enormous organizations that make who knows how much money untold

 uncalculable amounts of money

 Selling drugs and bring them into this country and one of the things they do is they they put fentanyl and everything to make things

 Stronger and they do it for like Street Xanax. There's people that have overdosed thinking they're getting Xanax and they fucking die

 Well, that's all yeah, they do it with cocaine. Of course

 They do it with everything

 There's so many things that have fentanyl in them and they're cut with fentanyl because fentanyl is cheap and insanely potent

 And that wouldn't be a problem if things were legal. So do you would you net out towards saying? All right, that's just yeah

 I would I would net out towards that but I would also put into place some serious mitigation

 Efforts like in terms of counseling drug addiction and ibogaine therapy, which is another thing

 That's someone was just telling me about how transformative this was for them

 yeah, I haven't experienced that personally, but I began for many of my friends that have had pill problems and I have a friend my

 friend Ed Clay who

 Started an ibogaine center in Mexico because he had an injury and he got hooked on pills and he couldn't kick it

 Did I begin gone one time done one time done 24-hour super uncomfortable experience a horrible experience, right?

 Yeah, it's supposed to be not very recreational not exactly something you want to do on the weekend with friends

 it's something you do because you're fucked and you need to figure out how to get out of this fuckness and

 That like we think about how much money is spent on rehabs in this country. And what's the relapse rate?

 It's really high. I mean, I have many friends that have been to rehab for drug and alcohol abuse and

 Quite a few of them went right back to it quite a few. It doesn't seem to be that effective

 It seems to be effective to people

 when people have like they really hit rock bottom and they have a strong will and then they get involved in a program some sort

 of a 12-step program or some sort of a narcotics anonymous program and then they

 they get support from other people and they eventually build this foundation of other types of behaviors and

 Ways to find other things to focus on to the whatever aspect of their mind that allows them to be addicted to things

 Now it's focused on exercise meditation yoga, whatever it is

 That's your new addiction and it's a much more positive and beneficial addiction. But the reality of the physical addiction is

 That there are mitigation efforts like there's so many people that have taken psilocybin and completely quit drugs

 Completely quit cigarettes completely quit a lot because they realize like oh, this is what this is. This is why I'm doing this

 Yeah, that's that's why I was more optimistic that the world would have made faster progress towards acceptance of

 You hear so many stories like this. Mm-hmm. So I would say like, all right, clearly a lot of our existing mental health treatment

 At best doesn't work. Clearly our addiction programs are

 Ineffective if we have this thing that in every scientific study or most scientific studies we can see is

 Delivering these like unbelievable results

 It's gonna happen. Yeah, and

 It yeah, I still am excited for it. I still think it'll be a transformative positive development, but

 It'll change politics

 It'll it'll absolutely change the way we think of other human beings

 It'll absolutely change the way we think of society and culture as a whole

 It'll absolutely change the way people interact with each other

 If it's if it becomes legalized and it's slowly becoming legalized like think of marijuana, which is like, you know, the gateway drug

 Marijuana is now legal recreationally in how many states?

 23 and and then medically and many more and

 You know, it's really easy to get a license medically in California. He's just I got one in

 1996 he used to be able to just go somewhere and go I get a headache

 That's it yeah, I get headaches I'm in pain a lot, you know, I do a lot of martial arts. I'm always injured

 I need some medication. I don't like taking pain pills BAM. You got a legal prescription for weed

 I used to have to go to Englewood to get it. I used to have to go to the hood to the Englewood Wellness Center and

 I was like, this is crazy. Like marijuana is now kind of sort of legal. Yeah, and then in

 2016 it became legal in California

 Recreationally and it just changed everything

 I have all these people that were like right-wing people that were taking edibles to sleep

 You know, I'm like this is because now that it's legal. They thought about it in a different way and

 I think that that drug which is a fairly mild psychedelic also has

 Enhancing effects it makes people more compassionate. It makes people more kind and friendly

 It's sort of the opposite of a drug that that enhances violence. It doesn't enhance violence at all

 It's just it does it like alcohol does that cocaine does that to say a thing that'll make me very unpopular?

 I hate marijuana. It does not sit well with me at all. What does it do to you that you don't like?

 Ah, it makes me tired and slow for a long time after it. Mm-hmm. I think also there's biological

 Variabilities right like some people like my wife. She does not do well with alcohol

 She can get drunk off one drink, but it's biological

 Like she she got some sort of a genetic - I forget what it's called something about Billy Rubin like some something

 Her body just doesn't process alcohol very well. So she's a cheap date

 Oh, all I meant is that genetically I got whatever the mutation is that makes it an unpleasant experience

 Yeah, what I was saying is for me, that's the opposite alcohol doesn't bother me at all

 I could I could drink three four drinks and I'm sober in 20 minutes

 Hmm, and my body just my liver just like a blast just goes right through it. I can sober up real quick, but I

 Also don't need it. Like I'm doing sober October the whole month. I don't feel good. Yeah did shows last night great

 No problems that not having alcohol doesn't seem to bother me at all, but I do like it

 I do like a glass of wine. It's a nice thing at the end. Yeah, I like it

 speaking of that and

 Psychedelics in general I you know many cultures have had a place for some sort of psychedelic

 Time in someone's life or rite of passage, but as far as I can tell most of them are under

 There's some sort of ritual about it and I don't worry that

 and I think these

 These things are so powerful that I worry about them. Just being like kind of

 Yeah used all over the place all the time. Yeah, and I

 Hope that we as a society because I think this is not gonna happen. Even if it's slow find a way to treat this with

 The respect that it needs

 Yeah, we'll see how that goes agreed. Yeah, I think set and setting is very important and

 Thinking about what you're doing before you're doing it and why you're doing it

 Like I was saying the other night when I had this psychedelic experience. I was just like

 Yeah, sometimes I just think too much about the world and that it's so fucked and you have kids and you wonder like what?

 What kind of a world are they gonna grow up in and what is and it was just one of those days where I was?

 Just like god, there's so much anger and there's so much this and that and then it's just

 It took it away from me the rest of the day like that night

 I was so friendly and so happy and I just wanted to hug everybody. I just really get I got it

 I go. Oh my god, that's not

 Thinking about it wrong. Do you think the anger in the world is way higher than it used to be or we just

 It's like all these dynamics from social media we were talking about

 I think the dynamics in social media certainly exacerbated anger in some people, but I think anger in the world is just a part of

 Frustration inequality

 Problems that are so clear but are not solved and all the issues that people have I mean

 It's not a coincidence that a lot of the mass

 Violence that you're seeing in this country mass looting and all these different things are being done by poor people

 Do you think AGI will be a equalizing force for the world or further inequality?

 I think it would be it depends on how it's implemented

 I my concern is again what we're talking about before with some sort of a neural interface

 That it will increase your ability to be productive to a point where you can control resources so much more than anyone else

 and you will be able to advance your

 Your economic portfolio and your influence in the world through that your amount of power that you can acquire

 It will before the other people can get involved because I would imagine

 Financially, it'll be like cell phones in the beginning. You remember when?

 The movie Wall Street when he had that big brick. Oh, yeah phone. It's like look at him

 He's out there on the beach with a phone. That was crazy

 No one had one of those things back then and they were so rare

 I got one in 1994 when I first moved to California and I thought I was living in the fucking giant thing

 No, it was a Motorola StarTAC. That was a cool phone. I actually had one on in my car in

 1988 I was one of the first people to get a cell phone

 I got one in my car and it was great because my friend my friend Bill Blumenreich who runs the comedy connection

 He would call me because he knew he could get a hold of me like someone got sick or fell out

 I could get a gig because he could call me so I was in my car. He's like Joe. What are you doing?

 Do you have a spot tonight? And I'm like, no, I'm open. He's like fantastic. And so he'd give me gigs

 So I got a bunch of gigs through this phone where it kind of paid itself

 But I got it just because it was cool like I could drive down the street and call people dude

 I'm driving and I'm calling you like it was nuts to be able to drive and I had a little antenna little squirrely

 I with a little tail antenna on my car on the roof of the car, but

 Now everyone has one

 You know, you can go to a third world country and you know people in small villages have phones. It's it's super common

 It's everywhere essentially more people have phones then don't have folks. There's more phones than there are human beings

 Which is pretty fucking wild and I think that that

 initial cost problem

 It's going to be prohibitively expensive

 Initially and the problem is the wealthy people are going to be able to do that

 Yeah, and then the real crazy ones that wind up getting the holes drilled in their head

 And if that stuff is effective, maybe it's not Jenna. Maybe there's problems with generation one, but generation two is better

 There's gonna be a time where you have to enter into the game

 There's gonna be a time where you have to sell your stocks like you don't don't wait too long. Hang on there go and

 Once that happens. My concern is that the people that have that will have

 Such a massive advantage over everyone else that they have the gap between the haves and have-nots

 Will be even further and it'll be more polarized. This is something I've changed my mind on I you know

 Someone it open. I said to me a few years ago

 Like you you really can't just let some people merge without a plan because it could be such an incredible

 Distortion of power and we're gonna have to have some sort of societal discussion about this. Yeah, that seems real

 That seems like yeah

 Especially if it's as effective as

 AGI is or as a excuse me chat GPT is chat GPT is so amazing

 When you enter into it information you ask it

 Questions and it can give you answers and you could ask it to code a website for you and it doesn't instantly and it solves

 Problems that literally you would have to take decades to try to solve and it gets to it right away

 This is the dumbest it will ever be. Yeah, that's what's crazy. That's what's crazy

 So imagine something like that, but even more advanced multiple

 stages of improvement and innovation forward and then it

 Interfaces directly with the mind, but it only does it with the people that can afford it

 Yeah, and those people are just regular humans. So they haven't been

 There's they haven't been enhanced. We haven't we haven't evolved

 Physically, we still have all the human reward systems in place. We're still basically these territorial primates and

 Now we have you know, you just imagine some fucking psychotic billionaire who now

 Gets this implant and decides to just completely hijack our financial systems

 acquire all the resources

 Set into place regulations and influences that only benefit them and then make sure that they can control it from there

 How much do you think this actually though even requires like a physical?

 implant or like a physical merge versus just some people have access to

 GPT-7 and can spend a lot on the inference compute for it and some don't I

 Think that's going to be very transformative, too. But my thought is that once

 I

 mean we have to think of what are the

 possibilities of a neural enhancement if you think about the human mind and how the human mind interacts with the world how you

 interact with language and thoughts and facts and

 something that is

 Exponentially more powerful than that, but it also

 Allows you to use the same emotions the same ego the same desires and drives

 Jealousy lust hate anger all of those things

 but with this

 godlike power

 when one person can read minds and other people can't when one person has a

 completely accurate forecast of all of the trends in terms of stocks and yeah and

 Resources and commodities and they can make choices based on those. I totally see all of that. The only thing I'm I

 feel a little confused about is

 You know human

 Talking and listening bandwidth or typing and reading bandwidth is not very high

 But it's high enough where if you can just say like tell me everything that's gonna happen in the stock market if I want to

 Go make all the money. What should I do right now?

 And then just shows you on the screen

 Even without a neural interface. You're kind of a lot of the way

 Now you're describing sure with with stocks

 or with like, you know, tell me how to like

 Invent some new technology that will change the course of history. Hmm. Yeah

 Yeah, all those things like I think what somehow matters is access to massive amounts of computing power

 Especially like differentially massive amounts maybe more than the interface itself

 I think that certainly is going to play a massive factor in the

 Amount of power and influence a human being has having access to that

 my concern is that what neural interfaces are going to do is

 Now you're not a human mind

 Interacting with that data now you are some

 massively in advanced version of what a human mind is and

 It has

 just profound

 Possibilities that we can't even imagine we can imagine but we can't yeah

 We can't truly conceptualize them because we don't have the context. We don't have that ability in that possibility

 Currently we could just we can just guess but when it does get implemented

 That you're dealing with a completely different being

 The

 Only true thing as I could say is I don't know yeah

 do you

 Wonder why it's you. Do you ever think like how am I at the forefront of this?

 spectacular change

 um

 Well, first of all, I think it's very much like I

 Think this is you could make the statement for many companies, but none. Is it as

 true for as opening eyes like

 The CEO is far from the most important person in the company like in our case

 There's a large handful of researchers each of which are individually more critical to the success

 We've had so far and that we will have in the future than me

 but even

 that and

 I bet those people like really were like hmm. This is a weird to be them

 but

 It's certainly weird enough for me that it like ups my simulation hypothesis probability somewhat

 hmm

 What when if you had to give a guess

 what

 When you think about the possibility of simulation theory, what what what kind of percentage do you I've never not had any number on it

 like

 You know, it's see every argument that I've read written explaining why it's like super high probability that all seems reasonable to me

 Feels impossible to reason about though

 What about you? Yeah, same thing. I go maybe but it's still what it is

 And I have to that's that's the main thing is I think it doesn't matter. I think it's like, okay

 It kind of it kind of Matt. It definitely matters I guess but there's not a way to know

 Currently and also what what matters though?

 well

 if if this really is I mean our inherent understanding of life is that we are these biological creatures that

 Interact with other biological creatures

 we we mate and breed and that this creates more of us and

 That hopefully as society advances and we acquire more information more understanding and knowledge

 This next version of society will be superior to the version that preceded it

 Which is just how we look at society today. Nobody wants to live in

 1860 where you died of a cold and there's no cure for infections. It's much better to be alive now. You're like

 just

 inarguably, there's

 Unless you really do prefer the simple life that you see on Yellowstone or something

 Like there's it's like what we're dealing with now

 We're in term first of all access to information the the lack of ignorance if you're if you choose

 to seek out information you have so much more access to it now than ever before that's so cool and

 Overtime like if you go back to the beginning of written history to now

 One of the things that is clearly evident is the more access to information the better choices people can make they don't always make better

 Choices, but they certainly have much more of a potential to make better choices with more access to information

 You know

 We think that this is just this biological thing, but imagine if that's not what's going on

 Imagine if this is a program and that you are just consciousness that's connected to this thing

 that's creating this experience that is

 Distinguishable from what we like to think of as a real biological experience from carbon-based life forms

 interacting with solid physical things in

 the real world

 It's still unclear to me what I'm supposed to do differently or think yeah, there's no answer. Yeah, you're a hundred percent, right?

 What can you do differently?

 I mean if you exist as if it's a simulation if you just live your life as if it's a simulation is that I

 Don't know if that's the solution, you know, I don't I think I mean it's real to me no matter what. Mm-hmm. It's real

 Yeah

 I'm gonna live it that way

 Mm-hmm

 And that will be the problem with an actual simulation if and when it does get implemented

 Yeah, if we do create an actual simulation that's indistinguishable from real life

 like

 What are the rules of the simulation?

 How does it work is that simulation fair and equitable and much more reasonable and peaceful

 This is there no war in that simulation. Should we all agree to

 hook up to it because we will have a completely different experience in life and all the the the angst of crime and

 Violence and the things we truly are terrified of there will be non-existent in this simulation

 Yeah, I mean if we keep going it seems like if you just look if you just extrapolate from where VR is now

 Did you see the podcast that?

 Lex Friedman did with Mark Zuckerberg. I saw some clips, but I haven't got to watch all this are right

 So they're they're essentially using like very realistic physical avatars in the metaverse

 like that's

 That's step one. That's maybe that's step three. Yeah, maybe it's a little bit on point. Yeah, maybe it's Atari

 Maybe you're playing Space Invaders now

 But whatever it is, it's on the path to this thing that will be indistinguishable that seems inevitable

 Those two things seem inevitable to me the inevitable thing to me is that we will create a life-form. That is an artificial

 Intelligent life-form that's far more advanced than us and once it becomes sentient

 it will be able to create a far better version of itself and then as it has

 Better versions of itself. It will keep going and if it keeps going it will reach God-like

 capabilities the complete

 understanding of every aspect of the universe and the

 Structure of it itself how to manipulate it how to travel through it how to communicate

 And that you know if we keep going if we survive a hundred years a thousand years ten thousand years

 And we're still on this same

 technological exponential increasing and capability path

 That's God

 We become something like a god and that might be what we do that might be what?

 Intelligent curious innovative life actually does it creates something that creates the very universe that we live in

 Like creates the next simulation and then yeah, I mean maybe that's the birth of the universe itself is creativity and intelligence and

 That it all comes from that. I just have this joke about the Big Bang

 Like what if what if the Big Bang is just a natural thing like humans get so advanced that they create a Big Bang machine

 And then you know

 We're so autistic and riddled with Adderall that we'd have no

 Concept or worry of the consequences and someone's like I'll fucking press it and they press it and boom

 We start from scratch every 14 billion years and then that's what a Big Bang is. I

 Mean I don't know where it goes

 But I do know that if you looked at the human race from afar if you were an alien life-form completely detached from

 Any understanding of our culture any understanding of our biological?

 Imperatives and you just looked at like what is this one dominant species doing on this planet?

 It makes better things. That's what it does that I agree goes to war it

 You know, it steals it does a bunch of things that it shouldn't do it pollutes does all these things that are terrible

 but it also

 Consistently and constantly creates better things whether it's better weapons going from the catapult to the rifle to the

 Cannonballs to the rocket ships to the hypersonic missiles to nuclear bombs. It creates better and better and better things

 that's the number one thing it does and it's never happy with what it has and the you

 You add that to consumerism, which is baked into us and this desire this constant desire for new or better things

 Well that fuels that innovation because that gives it the resources that it needs to consistently innovate and constantly create newer and better things

 Well where if I was an alien life-form, I was like, oh, what is it doing? It's trying to create better

 Well, what is the forefront of it technology?

 technology is the most transformative the most spectacular the most interesting thing that we create and

 The most alien thing the fact that we just are so comfortable that you can facetime with someone in New Zealand

 Like instantly we can we can get used to anything pretty badly, you know anything take it for granted. Oh, mm-hmm

 Yeah, and well if you were an alien life-form and you were looking at us, you're like, what is it doing?

 Oh keeps making better things. It's gonna keep making better things

 Well, if it keeps many making better things, it's gonna make a better version of a thinking thing and it's doing that right now

 And you're a part of that. It's gonna make a better version of a thinking thing with that better version of a thinking thing

 It's basically now in the amoeba stage. It's in the you know, small multicellular life-form stage

 well, what if that version becomes a fucking Oppenheimer what if that version because like if it scales up so far

 Yeah that it becomes so hyper intelligent that it is

 completely alien to any other intelligent life-form that has ever existed here before and

 It constantly does the same thing makes better and better versions of it

 Well, where does that go? It goes to a god it goes to something like a god and maybe God is a real thing

 but maybe it's a real consequence of this process that human beings have of

 consistently constantly innovating and

 Constantly having this desire to to push this envelope of

 creativity and of technological power

 I guess it comes down to maybe a definitional disagreement about what you mean by it

 It becomes a god like I can totally I

 Think it becomes something much like unbelievably much smarter and more capable than we are

 And what does that thing become if that keeps going?

 And maybe the way you mean it as a godlike force is that that thing can then go create can go simulate in a universe

 Yes, okay that I that that that I can resonate. Yeah

 I think whatever we create will still be subject to the laws of physics in this universe, right?

 Yeah, maybe that is the overlying fabric that God exists in

 The God word is a fucked up word because it's just been so co-opted

 but you know, I was having this conversation with Stephen Meyer who is

 He's a physicist. I believe he's a physicist is and he's also religious

 It was a real weird conversation very fascinating conversation. What kind of religion in Christ?

 Yeah, he even believes in the resurrection which I found very interesting

 but you know, it's it's

 Interesting communicating with him because he has these little

 Predesigned speeches that he's encountered all these questions so many times that he has these very well

 Worded very articulate responses to these things that I sense are like bits

 You know

 Like when I'm talking to a comic in like a comic like they all get this bit on train travel and they just tell you

 They tell you the bit like that's what it's like

 He has bits on why he believes in Jesus and why please and very very intelligent guy, but I propose the question

 When we're thinking about God, what if the instead of God created the universe? What if the universe is God and

 The creative force of all life and all everything is the universe itself

 Instead of thinking that there's this thing that created this is like close to a lot of Eastern religions

 I think yeah easier thing to wrap my mind around than any other religions for me and that is

 The I when I do psychedelics I get that feeling I get that feeling like there's this

 insane soup of

 like innovation and and and

 Connectivity that exists all around us, but our minds are so primal. We're this fucking thing

 you know, this is this is what we used to be and

 That what is that? It's um, there's a guy named Shane against the machine. Who's this artist who created this?

 It's a chimpanzee skull that he made out of zildjian symbols. So I see that it's got a little zildjian

 Lodro, he left that on the back and he just made this dope art piece. Cool. It's just cool

 But I wonder if our limitations are

 That we are an advanced version of primates. We're still we still have all these things that we talked about jealousy envy anxiety lust

 anger fear violence all these things that are detrimental but were

 important for us to survive and get to this point and that as

 time goes on we will figure out a way to engineer those out and that as

 Intelligent life becomes more intelligent and we create a version of intelligent life. That's far more intelligent than what we are

 We're far more capable of what we are if that keeps going if it just keeps going

 I mean chat GPT imagine if you go to chat GPT and go back to Socrates and

 Show him that explained in that and show him a phone and you know and put it on a phone and have access to it

 He'd be like what have you done? Like what is this?

 Like I bet he'd be much more impressed with the phone than chat GPT. I

 Think you'd be impressed with the phones abilities to communicate for sure

 But then the access to information would be so profound being back then

 I mean look you're you're dealing with a time when Galileo was

 Put under house arrest because he had the gumption to say that the earth is not the center of the universe

 Well now we fucking know it's not like we have satellites. We have we send

 Literal cameras into orbit take photos of things

 No, I totally get that

 I just meant that we kind of know what it's like to talk to a smart person and so in that sense

 You're like, oh, all right

 I didn't think you could like talk to a not person and have them be person like in some responses some of the time

 Mm-hmm, but a phone man

 If you just like woke up after 2,000 years and there was like a phone that would yeah

 No model for that. You didn't get to get there gradually. Yeah. No eating it

 My friend Eddie Griffin has a joke about that

 He's about how Alexander Graham Bell had to be doing coke

 He goes cuz only someone on coke would be like I want to talk to someone who's not even here

 That's what phone is that something coke makes people want to do I don't know I've never done coke

 But I would imagine it is I mean, it's just me like it just makes people like

 Angry and chaotic. Yeah a little that but they're also have ideas, you know

 Yeah

 I mean but back to this. Where does it go if it keeps going?

 It has to go to some impossible

 Level of capability. I mean just think of that that I believe is yeah

 well, we're able to do now with nuclear power and nuclear bombs and and

 in the hypersonic missiles and that's just the insane

 physical things that we've been able to take out of the human creativity and imagination and through engineering and

 technology implement these physical devices that are

 Indistinguishable from magic if you brought them 500 years ago. Yeah, I think I think it's quite remarkable

 It's okay. Keep going. Keep going a hundred thousand years from now if we're still here if something like us is still here

 What can it do?

 In the same way that I don't think Socrates would have predicted the phone. I can't predict that no, I'm probably totally off

 But maybe that's also why comets exist

 Maybe it's a nice reset just like leave a few around

 Give them a distant memory of the utopian world that used to exist

 Have them go through thousands of years of barbarism of horrific behavior and then reestablish society

 I mean, this is the Younger Dryas impact theory that allow

 11,800 years ago at the end of the Ice Age that we were hit by multiple comments that caused the instantaneous

 Melting of the ice caps over North America and everything flooded

 Everything's the the source of the flood myths from the Epic of Gilgamesh in the Bible and all those things and that this and also

 There's physical evidence of it when they do core samples. There's high levels of iridium

 Which is very common in space very rare on earth

 There's micro diamonds that are from impacts and that it's like 30% of the earth like that has evidence of this

 And so it's very likely that these people that are proponents of this theory are correct and that this is why they find these ancient

 Structures that they're now dating to like 11,000 12,000 years ago when they thought people are hunter-gatherers

 And they go, okay, maybe our timeline is really off and maybe this physical evidence. Yeah, I've been watching that with interest

 Yeah, Randall Carlson is the greatest guy to pay attention to Randall. Yeah, he's kind of dedicated his whole life to it

 Which by the way happened because of a psychedelic experience

 he was on acid once and he was looking at this immense Canyon and he had this vision that it was created by

 instantaneous erosions of the the polar caps and that it just

 washed this wave of impossible water through the the earth it just caught these paths and

 now there seems to be actual physical evidence of that that is probably what took place and

 That you know, we we're just the survivors and that we have re-emerged in that society and human civilization

 Occasionally gets set back to a primal place. Yeah, you know, who knows if you're if you're right that what happens here is we kind of

 Edit out all of the impulses in ourselves that we don't like and we get to that world seems kind of boring

 So maybe that's when we have to make a new simulation to watch people

 Think they're going through some drama or something or maybe it's just

 We get to this point where we have this power

 But the haves and the have-nots the divide is too great and that people did

 get a hold of this technology and use it to oppress people who didn't have it and that the

 We didn't mitigate the human

 biological

 Problems the reward systems that we had I got to have more you got to have. Yeah

 So this is this sort of natural inclination that we have for competition and that someone hijacks that I

 Think this is gonna be such a hugely important issue to get ahead of before the first people push. Yeah

 What do you think about?

 Like when Elon was causing calling for a pause on AI

 He was like starting an AGI company while he was doing that

 Yeah

 Didn't he start it like after he was calling for the pause?

 I think before but I don't remember in any case of one of those you can't beat him join them things. Um, I

 Think the instinct of saying like we've really got to figure out how to

 Make this safe and good and like widely good is really important, but I think

 Calling for a

 Pause is like naive it at best. I kind of like I

 Kind of think you can't make progress on the safety part of this as we mentioned earlier by sitting like in a room and thinking

 Hard you've got to see where the technology goes

 You've got to have contact with reality and then when you like but we're trying to like make progress towards AGI

 Conditioned on it being safe and conditioned on it being beneficial

 and so when we hit any kind of like block we try to find a technical or a

 Policy or a social solution to overcome it that could be about the limits of the technology and something not working and you know

 Hallucinates or it's not getting smart or whatever or it could be there's this like safety issue

 We've got to like redirect our resources to solve that but it's all like

 For me, it's all this same thing of like we're trying to solve the problems that emerge at each step as we get

 we're trying to go and

 You know, maybe you can call it a pause if you want if you pause on capabilities to work on safety

 but in practice, I think the field has gotten a little bit wander on the axle there and

 Safety and capabilities are not these two separate things. This is like I think one of the dirty secrets of the field

 it's like we have this one way to make progress, you know, we can understand and push on deep learning more and

 That can be used in different ways, but it's I think it's that same technique that's gonna help us eventually

 Solve the safety. Um that all of that said

 as like a human

 Emotionally speaking I super understand why it's tempting to call for a pause

 Happens all the time in life, right? This is moving too fast, right? I we got a pause here

 Yeah

 How much of a concern is it in terms of national security that we are the ones?

 That come up with this first

 Well, I would say that if an

 Adversary of ours comes up with it first and uses it against us and we don't have

 Some level of capability that feels really bad. Yeah, but I hope that what happens is this can be a moment where?

 To tie it back to the other conversation

 We kind of come together and overcome our base impulses and say like let's all do this as a club together

 That would be better. That would be nice and maybe

 through

 AGI and through the implementation of this technology it will make translation

 Instantaneous and easy. So well that's already happened, right?

 But I mean it hasn't happened in real time the point where you can

 Accurately communicate very soon. Very soon. Very soon. Yeah, I

 I do think for what it's worth that

 The world is gonna come together here

 I don't think people have quite realized the stakes

 But this is like I don't think this is a geopolitical if this comes down to like a geopolitical fight or race

 I don't think there's any winners and

 So I'm optimistic about people coming together

 Yeah, I am too. I mean, I think

 Most people would like that if you asked the vast majority of the human beings that are alive

 Wouldn't it be better if everybody got along?

 You know, maybe you can't

 Go all the way

 There and say we're just gonna have one global effort

 But I think at least we can get to a point where we have one global set of rules safety standards

 Organization that makes sure everyone's following the rules. We did this for atomic weapons

 And similar things in the world of biology. I think we'll get there. That's a good example the nuclear weapons

 because

 We know the destructive capability of them and because of that we haven't detonated one since 1947

 Pretty incredible. Yeah, pretty incredible other than tests. Yeah, we haven't used one in

 Terms of war 45 or 47. When was the end of the World War two?

 Wasn't it 47?

 When they dropped the bombs, I think that was 45. I was wondering if there's more after that. I didn't know about no

 It might be for I think it was

 45 so from 1945, which is pretty extraordinary. That's right. It's remarkable. I would not have predicted that I think yeah, I could teleport back to

 45 no, I would have thought oh my god. This is just gonna be something that people do just launch bombs on cities

 yeah, I mean I would have said like

 We're not gonna survive this for very long and there was a real fear of that for sure

 It's pretty extraordinary that they've managed to stop that this this threat of mutually assured destruction

 Self-destruction is to destruction universe. I mean the whole world we have enough weapons to literally make the world inhabit of uninhabitable

 and

 Because of that we haven't done it

 Which is a good side. I think that I was gonna say I think that should give some hope. Yeah, it should I mean

 Steven Pinker gets a lot of shit for his work because he just like sort of downplays

 Violence today, but it's not that he's downplaying violence today

 He's just looking at statistical trends if you look at the reality of life today versus life a hundred years ago 200 years ago

 It's far more safer. Why do you think that's a controversial thing?

 Like why can't someone say sure we still have problems, but it's getting better because people don't want to say that

 They they're especially people who are activists. They're they're completely

 Engrossed in this idea that there's problems today and these problems are huge and there's there's Nazis and there's but no one's saying

 There's not huge problems, right? No one's saying there's not but just to say things are better today. Yeah, I guess that people

 They just don't want to hear that right?

 But those are also people that are addicted to the problems the problems become their whole life solving those problems become their identity

 being involved in the solutions or what they believe their solutions to those problems become their life's work and

 Someone comes along actually life is safer than it's ever been before

 Interactions and police say that's deeply invalidated. Yeah

 But also true, you know, and again, what what is the problem? Why paint? Why can't people recognize that? Well, it's

 the primate brain

 I mean

 It's all the the problems that we highlighted earlier and that that might be the solution

 To overcoming that is through technology and that might be the only way we can do it without a long period of evolution

 because biological evolution is so relatively slow in

 comparison to technological evolution and that that might be our bottleneck was that we just still are dealing with this primate body and

 that something like general artificial general intelligence or something like some implemented form of

 engaging with it whether it's

 Neuralink something that shifts the way the mind interfaces with other minds

 Isn't it wild speaking of biological evolution? There will be people I think who were alive for

 The invention or discovery whatever you want to call it of the transistor

 There will also be alive for the creation of AGI one human lifetime. Yeah, you want to know a wild one from the

 Implementation from Orville and Wilbur Wright flying the plane. It was less than 50 years for someone dropped an atomic bomb out of it

 That's wild

 That's crazy less than 40 right that's crazy. Yeah bananas I

 Mean 60 something years to land on the moon nuts nuts

 Where you know, where is it going? I mean, it's just guesswork

 But it's interesting for sure. I mean, it's the most fascinating thing of our time for sure. It's fascinating

 Intellectually, and I also think it is one of these things that will be

 Tremendously net beneficial. Yeah, like

 You know, we've been talking a lot about

 problems in the world and I think that's just always a nice reminder of

 How much we get to improve and we're gonna get to improve a lot and this will be I think this will be the most

 powerful tool

 We have yet created to help us go go do that. I

 think you're right and

 This is an awesome conversation. Thanks for having us really really really appreciate it. And thanks for everything. Keep us posted and we'll do

